
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE
Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Replacement for Valvular Shock
in an Extremely Large Annulus
Rahul Annabathula, MD,a Anweshan Samanta, MD,a Haytham Allaham, MD,a Manu Mysore, MD,a
Patrick Odonkor, MD,b Anuj Gupta, MD,a Michael Benitez, MD,a Douglas Anderson, DO,c Diljon Chahal, MDa
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has become the preferred treatment for severe aortic
stenosis in many clinical scenarios, offering several beneﬁts over surgery. However, TAVR has limitations, especially in
patients with complex aortic anatomy. TAVR in extremely large annuli (ELA) (>1,000 mm2) is technically challenging
with limited data regarding its feasibility.
CASE SUMMARY A 65-year-old man presented in cardiogenic shock from combined severe aortic stenosis and
regurgitation in an ELA. His surgical risk was prohibitive, and he underwent successful TAVR with resolution of his
cardiogenic shock.
DISCUSSION This is the ﬁrst reported case of TAVR in an ELA for cardiogenic shock from combined severe aortic
stenosis and regurgitation using a balloon-expandable valve.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES This report highlights the feasibility of TAVR for severe aortic stenosis and aortic
regurgitation in ELA complicated by cardiogenic shock. Further research is needed comparing surgical replacement
and TAVR for patients with ELA. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103545) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on
behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS
A 65-year-old man initially presented to an outside
hospital for cardiac catheterization in preparation for
planned cardiac surgery. The catheterization was
aborted because the patient was profoundly dyspneic
and hypoxic (oxygen saturation of 85% on room air).
Initial laboratory values were notable for creatinine of
3.6 mg/dL (increased from a baseline of 1.0 mg/dL),
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 This report highlights the feasibility of TAVR
for severe aortic stenosis and aortic regur-
gitation in ELA complicated by cardiogenic
shock.
 Further research is needed comparing surgi-
cal replacement and TAVR for patients with
ELA.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103545
From the aDivision of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA; bDepartment of Anesthesiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; and the
cDivision of Cardiac Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received January 2, 2025; revised manuscript received February 7, 2025, accepted February 10, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
N-terminal pro–B-type natriuretic peptide of
>34,999
pg/mL,
lactate
of
4.0
mmol/L,
and white blood cell count of 19.5 K/mL.
Initial electrocardiogram (Figure 1) showed
normal sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 66
beats/min with evidence of left ventricular
hypertrophy.
Initial
chest
radiograph
(Figure 2) showed mild cardiomegaly with
increased pulmonary vascular congestion and multi-
focal bilateral airspace opacities.
Due to concerns for decompensated heart failure
and
superimposed
pneumonia,
the
patient
was
admitted
and
received
empirical
antibiotics
and
diuresis.
He
became
hypotensive
with
further
diuresis and with worsening acidosis and evidence of
ischemic liver injury. He was transferred to the
intensive care unit and started on phenylephrine and
continuous renal replacement therapy. Due to con-
cerns for worsening shock, he was transferred to our
facility for a higher level of care.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a past medical history of hyperten-
sion, tobacco use disorder, and moderate-to-severe
aortic stenosis with moderate aortic regurgitation.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In this patient presenting with worsening shock, chief
on the differential was cardiogenic shock due to
underlying aortic stenosis. Given the concern for
underlying pneumonia, septic shock was also on the
differential.
INVESTIGATIONS
On arrival to our institution, transthoracic echocar-
diogram revealed moderate left ventricular dilatation
with ejection fraction of 40% to 45%, and a trileaﬂet
aortic valve with severe aortic stenosis (peak aortic
velocity: 4.3 m/s, mean gradient: 46 mm Hg) and
severe eccentric aortic regurgitation (pressure half-
time: 205 milliseconds) (Videos 1 and 2, Figure 3).
The aortic root was moderately dilated at 4.2 cm.
Cardiac catheterization revealed severe (90%) steno-
sis of the mid-right coronary artery, severe (70%)
stenosis of proximal D1, and moderate (40%) disease
of proximal and mid-left anterior descending artery
(Videos 3 and 4). Computed tomography revealed an
extremely
large
aortic
annulus
(1040
mm2)
and
Agatston calcium score of approximately 5904 Agat-
ston units (Figure 4).
FIGURE 1
Initial Electrocardiogram Showing Normal Sinus Rhythm With Findings Indicative of Underlying Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
ELA = extremely large annulus
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
Annabathula et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR for Valvular Shock in an Extremely Large Annulus
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 5 4 5
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Given
the
extremely
large
annulus
(ELA)
and
technical difﬁculty and elevated risk of a trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), the deci-
sion was made to pursue further surgical evaluation
for combined aortic valve replacement and coronary
artery bypass graft to the right coronary artery and D1.
The calculated Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted
Risk of Mortality for coronary artery bypass graft and
aortic valve replacement was 36.1%. The Society of
Thoracic Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality for
isolated aortic valve replacement was >20%. Given
the patient’s clinical deterioration and limited thera-
peutic options, the decision was made to proceed
with high-risk TAVR after an extensive risk-beneﬁts
discussion with the patient and his family, outlining
the
risks
of
valve
embolization
and
procedural
mortality.
MANAGEMENT
A 29-mm SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA balloon-expandable
transcatheter
heart
valve
(THV)
(Edwards
Life-
sciences) was selected and prepared with an extra
8 mL of volume on the side port of the stopcock and
was
connected
to
another
inﬂator.
Given
the
near-horizontal orientation of the aortic root, the
decision was made to perform a predilation balloon
valvuloplasty using a 22-mm balloon, which did not
worsen the degree of baseline aortic regurgitation
(Videos 5 and 6). The THV delivery system was then
carefully advanced, and the valve markers were
properly aligned with the annular plane.
As prior reports have shown, it is safe to over-
expand the SAPIEN 3 system to better accommodate
larger annuli by using increasing amounts of contrast
volume.1 The maximum amount of contrast volume
that can be safely used to overexpand this THV, based
on the manufacturer’s recommendation, is 8 mL.
Based on our preprocedural calculations using third-
party sizing software, with an extra 8 mL of contrast
FIGURE 2
Initial Chest Radiograph Showing Evidence of
Cardiomegaly and Pulmonary Vascular Congestion
FIGURE 3
Initial Transthoracic Echocardiogram Showing Continuous Wave Doppler at the Level of the Aortic Valve Outlining the Combined Severe Aortic
Regurgitation and Stenosis
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Annabathula et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 5 4 5
TAVR for Valvular Shock in an Extremely Large Annulus
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
volume, it was estimated that the THV was under-
sized by nearly 25%. Therefore, a second THV was
prepared on the back table in the event a bail-out
valve-in-valve procedure was needed. Before deploy-
ment, the THV was overexpanded using the full 8 mL of
contrast volume on the back table, and the leaﬂets of
the THV showed intact coaptation (Figure 5), which
signiﬁcantly
decreased
our
concern
for
resultant
postdeployment, central aortic regurgitation.
Ultimately, the valve was successfully deployed
with the extra 8 mL of volume, resulting in adequate
valve
apposition
to
the
annulus
(Video
7).
Transthoracic echocardiogram in the cardiac cathe-
terization laboratory immediately postdeployment
revealed a well-seated THV with a calculated valve
area of 3.7 cm2 using the continuity equation, a mean
pressure gradient of 3 mm Hg, and no discernible
paravalvular regurgitation or central aortic regurgi-
tation (Video 8, Figure 6). The patient was subse-
quently transferred back to the cardiac intensive care
unit in stable condition.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
Soon after the deployment of the THV, hemody-
namics stabilized, and vasoactive medications were
discontinued. Renal function improved and contin-
uous renal replacement therapy was weaned and
ultimately
discontinued.
Discharge
planning
was
made for transfer to an acute care rehabilitation
facility with plans to medically manage his coronary
artery disease for the time being.
FIGURE 4
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement Scan Computed Tomography Angiography Cross Section of Aortic Valve Annulus
Annabathula et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR for Valvular Shock in an Extremely Large Annulus
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 5 4 5
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
DISCUSSION
Patients with severe aortic stenosis and ELA that
have a prohibitively high surgical risk pose a com-
plex clinical challenge for the heart team. Among
the
commercially
available
THVs,
the
balloon-
expandable prostheses are likely the best option for
patients with ELA given the ability to increase the
diameter of the THV by adjusting the inﬂation vol-
ume.
Real-world
data
capturing
the
utilization
of balloon-expandable THVs in ELA are limited.
Retrospective data analyzing the older generation
SAPIEN 3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences) have shown
that the use of balloon-expandable valves in ELA is
safe and effective,2,3 but the largest annulus noted
in these studies was 852 mm2. Real-world registry
data for the self-expanding Evolut R and Evolut
PROþ (Medtronic) valves4 have shown that they can
be successfully used in large annuli as well, but
these did not reach >1000 mm2. The Myval appa-
ratus (Meril Life Sciences), a newer generation of
balloon-expandable
THV,
has
shown
promise
in
FIGURE 5
Predeployment Preparation of the Transcatheter
Heart Valve With an Extra 8 mL of Contrast Volume
Showing Intact Leaﬂet Coaptation
FIGURE 6
Post-Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement Limited Transthoracic Echocardiogram Showing Continuous Wave Doppler at the Level of the Aortic
Valve Outlining the Signiﬁcant Reduction in the Gradient Across the Aortic Valve
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Annabathula et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 5 4 5
TAVR for Valvular Shock in an Extremely Large Annulus
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
treating patients with large annuli,5 but the annuli in
these
seminal
procedures
also
did
not
reach
>1000 mm2.
There have been other published reports6-8 of the
use
of
balloon-expandable
THVs
in
ELA
(>900-
1000 mm2). However, to our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst report of a balloon-expandable THV used to treat
concomitant severe aortic stenosis and aortic regur-
gitation in ELA (>1,000 mm2) for a patient in cardio-
genic
shock.
Real-world
observational
data
have
shown that TAVR in cardiogenic shock is feasible but
does carry higher in-hospital and 30-day mortality
compared with those individuals undergoing TAVR
not in cardiogenic shock.9 We have shown that this
procedure is not only feasible in this high-risk patient
population but also safe and effective. Future studies
are needed to determine the long-term outcomes of
balloon-expandable THVs in this patient population,
especially
compared
with
surgical
aortic
valve
replacement.
CONCLUSIONS
We report the ﬁrst case of successful TAVR in a pa-
tient with an extremely large annulus (>1000 mm2)
suffering from concomitant severe aortic stenosis and
regurgitation complicated by cardiogenic shock. The
use of balloon-expandable THVs in this high-risk pa-
tient population is feasible and safe, but further
studies are needed to monitor the long-term out-
comes of these interventions.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Rahul
Annabathula, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, 110 South
Paca Street, 7th Floor, Baltimore, Maryland 21201,
USA. E-mail: rannabathula@som.umaryland.edu.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Shivaraju A, Kodali S, Thilo C, et al. Over-
expansion of the SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart
valve: a feasibility study. JACC Cardiovasc Interv.
2015;8(15):2041–2043.
2. Tang GH, Zaid S, George I, et al. Impact of aortic
root anatomy and geometry on paravalvular leak in
transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement
with
extremely large annuli using the Edwards SAPIEN 3
valve. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;11(14):1377–
1387.
3. Mathur M, McCabe JM, Aldea G, Pal J, Don CW.
Overexpansion of the 29 mm SAPIEN 3 trans-
catheter heart valve in patients with large aortic
annuli (area >683 mm2): a case series. Catheter
Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;91(6):1149–1156.
4. Dallan LAP, Tang G, Forrest JK, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement in large annuli
valves with the supra-annular, self-expandable
Evolut platform in a real-world registry. Circ Car-
diovasc Interv. 2023;16(3):e012623.
5. Holzamer A, Bedogni F, van Wyk P, et al. Per-
formance of the 32 mm Myval transcatheter heart
valve for treatment of aortic stenosis in patients
with extremely large aortic annuli in real-world
scenario:
ﬁrst
global,
multicenter
experience.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2023;102(7):1364–1375.
6. Alvarez-Covarrubias HA, Xhepa E, Michel JM,
Kasel AM. 1000 mm2 plus aortic annulus: suc-
cessful treatment of a giant bicuspid aortic valve
with a Sapien 3 transcatheter heart valve. Eur
Heart J. 2020;41(29):2814.
7. Sherwood D, Nguyen P, Caranasos T, Vavalle J.
Successful aortic valve replacement by over-
expanding a SAPIEN transcatheter heart valve for
a large aortic annulus (> 900 mm2): a case report.
Eur Heart J Case Rep. 2023;7(3):ytad069.
8. Fukushima T, Ishizu K, Isotani A, Shirai S,
Ando K. Successful balloon-expandable trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement for extremely
large annulus (>1,000 mm2). JACCCase Rep.
2024;29(9):102302.
9. Goel K, Shah P, Jones BM, et al. Outcomes of
transcatheter aortic valve replacement in patients
with cardiogenic shock. Eur Heart J. 2023;44(33):
3181–3195.
KEY WORDS extremely large annulus,
TAVR, valvular shock
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Annabathula et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR for Valvular Shock in an Extremely Large Annulus
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 5 4 5
6
