
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Left Main Obstruction From Paravalvular 
Leak Closure Device in Patient With 
Surgical Aortic Valve Replacement
Noman Lateef, MD, a Muhammad Junaid Ahsan, MD, b Kurt M. Jacobson, MD a
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Paravalvular leak (PVL) is a relatively rare complication associated with prosthetic valve replacement, 
which in some cases can lead to congestive heart failure or complications of hemolysis.
CASE SUMMARY A 65-year-old man with prior surgical aortic valve replacement presented with symptoms of dys-
pnea, reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, and interval development of severe PVL.
DISCUSSION PVL can be managed either surgically or percutaneously. Although transcatheter closure is less invasive, 
it can cause rare complications such as coronary obstruction from vascular plug devices. Through this case, we show how 
to effectively manage such complications with coronary stenting in a patient with a large aortic PVL and low left cor-
onary ostia.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Coronary obstruction is a rare but serious complication of PVL closure device. It may be 
caused by device position or thrombus. Assessment requires multimodality imaging. Coronary stenting can effectively 
manage and prevent adverse events. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105222) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on 
behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
P 
aravalvular leak (PVL) is one of the most 
serious complications of prosthetic valve 
replacement, with an incidence from 6% to 
32%. PVLs are more common around mitral prosthe-
ses versus aortic prostheses (8%-22% vs 5%-17%, 
respectively). 1 Although most leaks are mild and 
have a benign course, an estimated 1% to 5% of 
PVLs can progress and lead to complications of
congestive heart failure, hemolytic anemia, and infec-
tive endocarditis. 2 For patients with symptomatic 
PVL, surgical repair has been the traditional treatment
approach. Despite the high mortality associated with 
reoperation, the outcomes are better as compared 
with conservative management. Given the recent ad-
vances in percutaneous transcatheter intervention, it 
has emerged as a less invasive alternative option, 
particularly in patients with prohibitive risk of sur-
gery. The rate of complications from PVL closure is 
relatively low, especially when compared with the re-
sults of surgical redo. 3 Nevertheless, complications 
such as coronary obstruction do occur and require 
complex and challenging decision-making and
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105222
From the a University of Wisconsin Hospitals and Clinics Program, Madison, Wisconsin, USA; and the b Baylor University Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received May 19, 2025; revised manuscript received June 30, 2025, accepted July 9, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
management. Herein, we describe a case of 
coronary flow obstruction from an aortic PVL 
closure device and the ensuing management.
CASE PRESENTATION
The patient was a 65-year-old man with his-
tory of aortic stenosis, for which he had un-
dergone aortic valve replacement with a 
25-mm 
Edwards 
Inspiris 
Resilia 
bio-
prosthetic valve a few months earlier. Post-
operatively, the patient felt well for a brief 
duration but was unfortunately admitted to an 
outside hospital with symptoms of congestive heart
VISUAL SUMMARY Managing Left Main Obstruction After Paravalvular Leak Closure
IVUS = intravascular ultrasound; PVL = paravalvular leak; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography; VP = vascular plug.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Coronary obstruction from vascular plug 
devices used for paravalvular leak closure is 
a rare but serious complication.
• It can lead to critical events either related to 
coronary flow compromise from the device 
itself or device-related thrombus with the 
potential to embolize into the coronary artery.
• Assessment of coronary obstruction requires 
multimodality imaging, and it can be 
effectively managed with stenting of the 
coronary ostium, which can help prevent 
future events.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
IVUS = intravascular
ultrasound
LM = left main
PVL = paravalvular leak
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiography
Lateef et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
Coronary Obstruction From PVL Closure Device 
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 2
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
failure. 
Transthoracic 
echocardiography 
(TTE) 
showed a reduction in left ventricular ejection frac-
tion to 35% from 60% previously. His bioprosthetic 
valve leaflets were functioning normally, however a 
prominent PVL was noted. This was further quanti-
fied on transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) to 
be severe (Figure 1, Video 1). The patient was started 
on guideline-directed medical therapy and was sub-
sequently referred to our structural clinic. In the 
clinic, the patient reported ongoing dyspnea on 
exertion, fatigue, and decreased energy, with overall 
NYHA functional class III symptoms. Laboratory 
work indicated normal hemoglobin, platelet count, 
and mildly elevated creatinine of 1.3 mg/dL, which 
was unchanged from baseline. Treatment options
including redo sternotomy and percutaneous PVL 
closure were discussed with the patient and heart 
team. Given ongoing symptoms and after mutual 
discussion, a plan was made to proceed with percu-
taneous PVL closure.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a prior history of hypertension, type 
2 diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia.
INVESTIGATION
The patient underwent cardiac computed tomogra-
phy (CT), which noted low coronary heights of
FIGURE 1 Transesophageal Echocardiography Showing Severe Paravalvular Regurgitation
FIGURE 2 Cardiac Computed Tomography Showing Left and Right Coronary Height Measurements
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5 
Lateef et al
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 2 
Coronary Obstruction From PVL Closure Device
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
6.2 mm for the left main (LM) and 10 mm for right 
coronary artery (Figure 2).
MANAGEMENT/INTERVENTION
Using right femoral artery access, we first performed 
a coronary angiogram. During engagement of the 
coronaries, it was clear from contrast back-filling that 
the leak was wrapping in the anterior and antero-
lateral positions. Given the low-rising LM close to the 
annulus of the surgical valve and the higher risk for
coronary interference and obstruction, we pre-
emptively obtained left femoral artery access 
(Figure 3, Video 2). Because of the crescentic nature 
of the leak, we elected to place 2 devices simulta-
neously. Through an AL1 guide catheter, an Impress 
multipurpose 125-cm sheath (Merit Medical) followed 
by a Glidecath (Terumo) was traversed through the 
anterolateral defect. After removing the Glidecath 
and over a stiff wire, a 5-F shuttle sheath was 
advanced into the left ventricle. Through this, 2 sup-
portive wires were placed in the left ventricle. Two 
simultaneous 8-mm Amplatzer vascular plug 2 (VP2) 
devices (Abbott) were then delivered across the 
defect using parallel shuttle sheaths (Figure 4). 
Repeat angiogram demonstrated essentially near-
elimination of the leak. However, the aortic foot of 
the device appeared to be protruding into the ostium 
of the LM (Video 3). There appeared to be no inter-
ference of the prosthetic valve leaflets by the devices. 
Using left femoral artery access, the LM was engaged 
using a 6-F EBU 3.5 guide, and intravascular ultra-
sound (IVUS) was performed. This demonstrated the 
foot of the device to be within the ostium of the LM 
and, although not flow limiting, somewhat obstruc-
tive (Figure 5). Multiple attempts to reposition 
including implantation at lower depths were unsuc-
cessful. The second device foot was in the aortic root 
but not protruding in the LM. At this point, we 
considered removing both devices and trying smaller 
VP2s, however it was uncertain if this would be 
effective at closing the leak and still cause LM 
interference, given the low origin, without risking 
device embolization. We then released both devices 
and placed a 5.0 × 15 mm drug-eluting stent in the LM 
by protruding the proximal stent edge slightly in the 
ostium. This successfully pinned the device out of 
the way, with repeat angiogram demonstrating robust 
coronary flow and no obstruction (Video 4). Repeat 
IVUS confirmed a well-placed stent, with no interfer-
ence of the device foot with the LM inflow (Figure 6). 
TEE demonstrated no interference with the valve, 
with trivial residual leak (Figure 7, Video 5). We then 
redirected toward the more anterior leak and placed a 
third 8-mm VP2 device across the defect. The leak 
appeared to be eliminated. Aortogram was then per-
formed, demonstrating trivial to mild aortic valve 
regurgitation (Video 6). No immediate complications 
were observed. Hemostasis was then obtained.
FOLLOW-UP
At the 2-month follow-up, the patient was feeling 
better, only getting dyspnea on exertion with stren-
uous activities (NYHA functional class I symptoms).
FIGURE 3 Coronary Angiogram Showing Paravalvular Leak 
and Low Left Main Coronary Height
FIGURE 4 Shuttle Sheath and 2 Amplatzer Vascular Plug Devices Across the Para-
valvular Leak
Steelcore wire in the left ventricle maintains the wire position.
Lateef et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
Coronary Obstruction From PVL Closure Device 
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 2
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
FIGURE 5 Intravascular Ultrasound Showing the Two 8-mm VP2 Devices
(Left) The first VP2 plug (red star) protruded well into the left main. (Right) The second VP2 plug (red circle) was less obstructive and away 
from the left main.
FIGURE 6 Repeat Intravascular Ultrasound Confirming Well-Placed Stent
(Left) The first VP2 plug (red star) was successfully pinned by the left main stent. (Right) The second VP2 plug (red circle) remained away 
from the left main.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5 
Lateef et al
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 2 
Coronary Obstruction From PVL Closure Device
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
TTE showed improved left ventricular ejection frac-
tion of 55% and only trivial residual PVL.
DISCUSSION
Clinically significant PVL can be treated either sur-
gically or using transcatheter closure devices. Surgi-
cal correction is favored in the setting of infective 
endocarditis, mechanical instability of the valve, and 
when concomitant cardiac surgery is needed. How-
ever, surgical options carry high failure rates, ranging 
from 12% to 35%, with mortality increasing after each 
reintervention. 4 Recently, percutaneous closure has 
emerged as an effective treatment strategy that can 
be offered as an alternative to surgery. Current 
guidelines give a Class IIa recommendation for 
percutaneous repair in high-risk surgical patients 
having symptoms of heart failure. 5
A multimodality imaging approach is pivotal in the 
assessment and preprocedural planning of PVL 
closure. TTE/TEE is the first-line imaging tool, as it 
can approximate the position, severity, and path of 
paravalvular regurgitation, with three-dimensional 
imaging providing a more comprehensive assess-
ment of the anatomical location, shape, and circum-
ferential extent of the PVL. Cardiac CT provides high 
accuracy in determining the presence, size, and 
shape of the PVL and identifies surrounding classifi-
cations. 
CT 
can 
also 
provide 
VTC 
(virtual
transcatheter heart valve–to–coronary ostia) assess-
ment, which can help in cases in which there is risk of 
coronary 
obstruction 
from 
closure 
devices. 
Conversely, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging has 
been shown to have more incremental utility over 
these modalities in providing both anatomical fea-
tures and quantification of PVL severity. Despite 
these modalities, understanding the complex PVL 
shape in order to use the appropriate closure device 
and size remains one of the challenges of percuta-
neous closure. In some cases, using an ex vivo three-
dimensional printed model to simulate PVL closure 
has been shown to be effective in ensuring minimal 
interference of the device with prosthetic value 
leaflet function. However, the high cost inherent to 
the equipment and software remains the main limi-
tation to widespread application of this technology. 6 
The safety and feasibility of percutaneous PVL 
closure has been reported by several studies. The 
reported technical success (defined as the correct 
deployment of an exclusive device throughout the 
PVL and the lack of significant residual regurgitation 
or new prosthetic valve malfunction) ranges from 
77% to 86%. Clinical success (defined as reduction of 
1 grade on NYHA functional class scale and/or 
improvement in hemolytic anemia) ranges from 67% 
to 77%. Procedure failures are attributed mainly to an 
inability to cross the defect or interference of the 
device with prosthetic valve function. 7
FIGURE 7 Transesophageal Echocardiography Showing Significant Reduction in Paravalvular Leak
Lateef et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
Coronary Obstruction From PVL Closure Device 
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 2
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Complications from PVL closure are relatively low; 
nevertheless, adverse events such as death, coronary 
obstruction, heart block, stroke, prosthetic leaflet 
impingement, emergency surgery, significant peri-
cardial effusion, or bleeding have been reported. In 
the HOLE registry study, which included mitral and 
aortic PVLs, the overall major event rate, including 
death, stroke, and emergency surgery, was 4.5%. 8 
The most frequent adverse events were vascular 
complications and bleeding (8.6%). 8
Coronary obstruction from aortic PVL closure de-
vices is rare and scarcely reported. To the best of our 
knowledge, there have been 2 prior reports of coro-
nary obstruction/occlusion from aortic PVL closure 
devices. A report from Hernández-Enríquez et al 9 
was about an 83-year-old woman who had an acute 
obstruction of the right coronary artery due to sus-
pected late device endothelization/thrombosis and 
subsequent coronary flow compromise and requiring 
emergent bypass grafting. The other case included an 
83-year-old woman who had partial obstruction of the 
left main ostium by the proximal disk of the device. 
Similar to our patient, her case was managed with left 
main stenting, with the proximal stent edge extending 
just proximal to the impinging occluder device. 10
There are no specific devices designed to treat 
PVLs. In an off-label fashion, Amplatzer vascular 
plugs are most commonly used. There are several 
types, of which VP1 is used in short landing zones 
and can be repositioned, whereas VP2 can be used in 
variable landing zones and is the most frequently 
used in reported cases. VP3 is used in high blood flow 
locations or challenging wall apposition cases, while 
VP4 is used in tortuous anatomies but is limited by 
small size. In our patient, we felt that the VP2 series 
were the most suitable. As indicated, VP1 is a single 
lobar plug for short landing spaces with a higher risk 
of embolization. The unconstrained length of the 8-
mm VP3 is similar to the VP2; hence, switching to 
this series was not felt to be any better than the 
currently deployed VP2. VP4 would have been a 
much larger device, with length of the device 
>10 mm and would have led to much higher and 
more certain risk of coronary obstruction. Regardless 
of the plug type, before releasing the device, a careful
assessment of device positioning, with special 
attention to interference with neighboring structures 
such valve leaflets or coronary arteries, is manda-
tory. 11 As in our case and prior reports, there was 
significant interaction of the proximal device foot 
with the LM ostium. In such cases, further evaluation 
using 2-or 3-dimensional TEE, fluoroscopy, and IVUS 
is needed to better understand this interaction. If the 
device cannot be repositioned away from the coro-
nary ostium and there is concern for possible coro-
nary flow restriction, protection of the coronary 
ostium with a wire, unexpanded balloon, and/or 
stent may be necessary to avoid undesirable future 
coronary events. In our case, given the LM coronary 
height of 6.2 mm and the unconstrained height of 
approximately 7 mm for the 8-mm VP2 device, pro-
tection by a wire or balloon was considered inade-
quate and thus stenting of the LM ostium was 
pursued as the best option.
CONCLUSIONS
A percutaneous approach is increasingly becoming an 
attractive option for PVL closure. Nevertheless, it is a 
complex and challenging procedure with several 
periprocedural risks and requires optimal patient 
selection and comprehensive intraprocedural imag-
ing guidance. One of these complications is coronary 
obstruction from vascular plug devices, which may 
require further intervention to protect the coro-
naries. In the future, better device designs including 
lower profiles, deflectable deliverable sheaths, and 
custom-made devices may further decrease such 
complications and lead to better procedural success 
and outcomes.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Kurt M.
Jacobson, Clinical Science Center, 600 Highland 
Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin 53792-0001, USA. 
E-mail: kmjacobs@medicine.wisc.edu.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Hascoët S, Smolka G, Blanchard D, et al. Pre-
dictors of clinical success after transcatheter 
paravalvular leak closure: an International
Prospective Multicenter Registry. Circ Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2022;15(10):e012193. https://doi.org/10. 
1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.122.012193
2. Güner A, Kırma C, Ertürk M, et al. Transcatheter 
closure or surgery for symptomatic paravalvular 
leaks: the multicenter KISS registry. J Am Heart
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5 
Lateef et al
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 2 
Coronary Obstruction From PVL Closure Device
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
Assoc. 2024;13(1):e032262. https://doi.org/10. 
1161/JAHA.123.032262
3. Emery RW, Krogh CC, McAdams S, Emery AM, 
Holter AR. Long-term follow up of patients 
undergoing reoperative surgery with aortic or 
mitral valve replacement using a St Jude med-
ical prosthesis. J Heart Valve Dis. 2010;19:473– 
484.
4. Echevarria JR, Bernal JM, Rabasa JM, 
Morales D, Revilla Y, Revuelta JM. Reoperation 
for bioprosthetic valve dysfunction. A decade of 
clinical experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1991;5 
(10):523–526. https://doi.org/10.1016/1010-7940 
(91)90105-S
5. Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. 2017 
AHA/ACC focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC 
guideline for the management of patients with 
valvular heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
task force on clinical practice guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2017;70:252–289. https://doi.org/10.1161/ 
CIR.0000000000000503
6. Ilardi F, Anastasius M, Lerakis S. Multimodality 
imaging is key for a successful paravalvular leak 
repair. JACC Case Rep. 2022;4(1):42–43.
7. Ruiz CE, Hahn RT, Berrebi A, Paravalvular Leak 
Academic Research Consortium. Clinical trial 
principles and endpoint definitions for para-
valvular leaks in surgical prosthesis: an expert 
statement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69(16):2067– 
2087. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehx211
8. García E, Arzamendi D, Jimenez-Quevedo P, 
et al. Outcomes and predictors of success and 
complications for paravalvular leak closure: an 
analysis of the Spanish real-wOrld paravalvular 
LEaks closure (HOLE) registry. Eurointervention. 
2017;12:1962–1968.
9. Hernández-Enríquez M, Ascaso M, Freixa X, 
et al. Late right coronary ostium occlusion after 
percutaneous aortic paravalvular leak closure:
immediate results do not always predict long-
term performance. J Invasive Cardiol. 2016;28 
(8):E69–E70.
10. Price MJ, Shah MG, Burke RF, Riley RD, 
Rizik DG. Impingement of left main ostium after 
device occlusion of paravalvular leak post-
transcatheter aortic valve replacement. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8:e1–e2. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jcin.2014.07.027
11. Zander T, Medina S, Montes G, Nuñez-
Atahualpa L, Valdes M, Maynar M. Endoluminal 
occlusion devices: technology update. MedDe-
vices Evid Res. 2014;7:425–436. https://doi.org/ 
10.2147/MDER.S49540
KEY WORDS aortic valve, percutaneous 
coronary intervention, valve replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Lateef et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
Coronary Obstruction From PVL Closure Device 
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 2
8
