
=== PAGE 1 ===
MINI-FOCUS ISSUE: PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS
CASE REPORT: CLINICAL CASE SERIES
Aortic Sinus Contrast Retention
During TAVR
A Warning Sign Preceding a Potential Thrombotic Complication
Lluis Asmarats, MD, PHD, Chi-Hion Li, MD, Xavier Millán, MD, PHD, Irene Menduiña, MD,
Estefanía Fernández-Peregrina, MD, Lola Gutiérrez-Alonso, MD, Mario Torres, MD, Antonio Serra, MD, PHD,
Dabit Arzamendi, MD, PHD
ABSTRACT
Sinus contrast material retention after transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a rare phenomenon that may
reﬂect an increased risk for thrombotic complications. We present 3 cases of persistent contrast agent retention in the
sinus of Valsalva during the TAVR procedure that portend the occurrence of embolic stroke or bioprosthetic valve
thrombosis. (Level of Difﬁculty: Advanced.) (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2022;4:666–670) © 2022 The Authors. Pub-
lished by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
INTRODUCTION
Despite the continued expansion of transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR) indications, throm-
botic events (stroke and valve thrombosis) following
TAVR remain a relevant concern. The incidence of
cerebrovascular events post-TAVR ranges from 1% to
11%, with an estimated incidence of subclinical leaﬂet
thrombosis of 10% to 15%.1,2 Thrombotic events post-
TAVR may occur as a combination of changes in the
coagulation cascade, along with modiﬁcation of ﬂow
dynamics (blood stasis resulting from stagnant ﬂow in
the sinuses of Valsalva [SoVs]). Here we present a
series of 3 patients presenting with early thrombotic
complications after TAVR, all preceded by dense,
persistent contrast material retention within the SoVs
during valve implantation.
PATIENT 1
An 86-year-old woman with previous breast cancer
treated with surgery and radiotherapy and severe
symptomatic aortic stenosis with a mean gradient of
38 mm Hg was referred for TAVR. Preprocedural
computed tomography (CT) conﬁrmed severe calciﬁc
aortic stenosis (calcium score, 2,372 AU) extending
toward the left ventricular outﬂow tract, with an aortic
annulus area of 402 mm2, perimeter of 72 mm and
mean diameter of 23 mm, large SoVs (32 mm), and a
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To recognize the retention of contrast ma-
terial in the sinus of Valsalva during TAVR.
 To
identify
this
characteristic
imaging
ﬁnding as a warning for potential thrombotic
complications.
 To provide close neurovascular surveillance
and consider early anticoagulation when
observing this rare phenomenon.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2022.03.031
From the Department of Cardiology, Santa Creu i Sant Pau Hospital, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received February 23, 2022; accepted March 28, 2022.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 4 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 2
ª 2 0 2 2 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E
O F
C A R D I O L O G Y
F O U N D A T I O N .
T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
narrow sinotubular junction ([STJ] 22 mm; 13 mm/m2)
(Figures 1A and 1B). Given the potential risk of annulus
rupture,
transfemoral
TAVR
with
a
mechanically
expandable valve (Lotus, Boston Scientiﬁc) was plan-
ned. Unfractionated heparin (70 U/kg) was used in all
procedures. After valvuloplasty with a 20-mm balloon,
a 23-mm valve was successfully implanted on the ﬁrst
attempt. Before valve release, marked contrast mate-
rial retention and slow washout were noticed in the
left coronary cusp (Figures 1C and 1D, Videos 1 to 3).
Transthoracic
echocardiography
showed
a
mean
gradient of 6 mm Hg and no residual aortic regurgita-
tion. Three hours after the procedure, the patient
experienced an acute right sensorimotor syndrome
(right-sided hemiparesis and sensory impairment).
Brain CT showed no new onset ischemic le-
sions, and the patient was discharged home
with aspirin therapy 9 days after the proced-
ure. At 6-month follow-up, the patient had
nearly full recovery of neurologic signs with
normal TAVR function.
PATIENT 2
A 73-year-old woman with severe aortic ste-
nosis was referred for aortic valve replace-
ment. She had a history of severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, previous ischemic stroke, amy-
loid angiopathy-related cerebellar hemorrhage, per-
manent atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) with percutaneous left
FIGURE 1
Patient 1
(A and B) Pre–transcatheter aortic valve replacement computed tomography scan showing severe valve calciﬁcation and a narrow sinotubular
junction. (C and D) Fluoroscopic view showing the upper stent frame extending above the sinotubular junction with contrast agent retention
(asterisks) in the left coronary sinus during and after valve implantation.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AF = atrial ﬁbrillation
CT = computed tomography
SoV = sinus of Valsalva
STJ = sinotubular junction
STS = Society of Thoracic
Surgeons
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 2
Asmarats et al
J U N E 1 , 2 0 2 2 : 6 6 6 – 6 7 0
Aortic Sinus Contrast Retention During TAVR
667

=== PAGE 3 ===
atrial appendage occlusion, and end-stage renal dis-
ease. After heart team review (Society of Thoracic
Surgeons [STS] risk score, 8.7%) and given her severe
peripheral vascular disease, left transaxillary TAVR
was indicated. Preprocedural CT showed moderate
aortic valve calciﬁcation, with an aortic annulus
perimeter of 69 mm and an area of 361 mm2 and a
calciﬁed STJ (Figures 2A and 2B). After predilatation
with a 20-mm balloon, a 25-mm Portico (Abbott
Vascular) valve was implanted with no need for
repositioning or recapture. Final angiography showed
mild
residual
aortic
regurgitation,
with
dense
contrast agent stagnation at the noncoronary sinus
(Figures 2C and 2D, Videos 4 and 5). Four hours later,
the patient experienced right hemiparesis (4/5) and
aphasia. Emergency head CT scan revealed occlusion
of the left middle cerebral artery (M2 segment), and
the
patient
underwent
emergency
thrombectomy
with TICI (Thrombolysis In Cerebral Infarction) grade
2b partial recanalization. Unfortunately, the patient
developed
hemorrhagic
transformation
and
died
3 weeks after the procedure.
PATIENT 3
An 84-year-old woman was admitted with an out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest. She had a history of verte-
brobasilar
insufﬁciency
and
nonischemic
dilated
cardiomyopathy
with
moderate
left
ventricular
dysfunction. Transthoracic echocardiography showed
severe aortic regurgitation with worsening left ven-
tricular systolic function (27%). Cardiac CT showed no
FIGURE 2
Patient 2
(A and B) Baseline computed tomography showing moderate valve calciﬁcation and a calciﬁed sinotubular junction. (C and D) Aortography
showing a short valve-to-aortic-wall distance above the noncoronary sinus with persistent contrast agent stagnation (asterisks).
Asmarats et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 2
Aortic Sinus Contrast Retention During TAVR
J U N E 1 , 2 0 2 2 : 6 6 6 – 6 7 0
668

=== PAGE 4 ===
coronary artery disease and mild aortic valve calciﬁ-
cation (49 AU), with an aortic annulus perimeter of
72 mm and an area of 416 mm2 (Figure 3A). After heart
team
review,
an
implantable
cardioverter-
deﬁbrillator was inserted, and TAVR was indicated
(STS risk score, 5.0%). The procedure was performed
through transfemoral access, and after 2 recaptures, a
34-mm Evolut Pro (Medtronic) valve was successfully
implanted
with
no
residual
aortic
regurgitation.
Given the presence of dense contrast material stag-
nation in the noncoronary cusp in the aortogram
(Figures 3B and 3C, Videos 6 and 7), the patient was
discharged on low-dose direct oral anticoagulant
therapy. At 1-month follow-up, a CT scan showed
subclinical
leaﬂet
thrombosis
between
the
non-
coronary and right coronary cusps (Figures 3D and 3E)
that
resolved
with
low-molecular-weight
heparin
treatment.
DISCUSSION
Sinus contrast material retention after TAVR is a rare
phenomenon potentially translating to an increased
thrombotic risk. The underlying etiologic factors may
involve the Virchow triad: endothelial injury or focal
sinus dissection (after predilatation, during delivery
system advancement, recapturing or repositioning
maneuvers, pigtail entrapment), blood stasis (ﬂow
stagnation and reduced washout within the neosinus,
a narrow or low STJ), and hypercoagulability (older
adult patients with cardiovascular risk factors).
In patients undergoing percutaneous left atrial
appendage occlusion, postangiography retention of
contrast material in the left atrial appendage has
been associated with an increased risk of device-
related thrombosis and a higher risk of thromboem-
bolic stroke.3 Of note, thrombosis is most likely to
FIGURE 3
Patient 3
(A) Baseline computed tomography showing no valve calciﬁcation. (B and C) Contrast agent stagnation in the noncoronary sinus (asterisks) during and after valve
implantation. (D) Hypoattenuation at the base of the commissure between the right and noncoronary cusps (arrowhead) with reduced leaﬂet motion. (E) Angles
between each commissure and the right coronary artery (RCA) with no signiﬁcant commissural misalignment.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 2
Asmarats et al
J U N E 1 , 2 0 2 2 : 6 6 6 – 6 7 0
Aortic Sinus Contrast Retention During TAVR
669

=== PAGE 5 ===
occur in low-ﬂow regions with long blood residence
time
and
poor
washout.4
In
particular,
sinus
sequestration, which is most commonly seen in pa-
tients with a low and narrow STJ who are receiving
taller-frame devices, may impair blood ﬂow to the
SoVs and coronary arteries and in turn may predis-
pose
patients
to
thrombosis.
STJ
diameter
and
height are relevant to identify anatomical features at
risk of sinus sequestration in redo TAVR, as well as
in native valves. Both patients 1 and 2 had narrow
STJs (22 and 26 mm, respectively), the former with a
low STJ (18 mm; 1 mm shorter than the 19-mm
prosthesis height of the mechanically expandable
valve) and the latter with STJ calciﬁcation. Hence, a
short residual distance between the valve and the
STJ in patients with small anatomical features may
create a cul de sac in the SoVs that contributes to
thrombus
formation,
akin
to
the
phenomenon
observed in patients with incomplete sealing of the
left atrial appendage. In other patients, sequestra-
tion may be functional rather than anatomical, as a
combination of reduced sinus washout, stasis, and
proneness to thrombosis, and thus more difﬁcult to
predict by CT. Indeed, it has been speculated that
blood ﬂow stagnation in large SoVs could also in-
crease the risk of hypoattenuated leaﬂet thickening
after TAVR.5 This was the case in patient 3, who,
despite large SoVs and STJ, had follow-up CT that
showed
isolated
thrombosis
of
the
noncoronary
cusp.
There
is
also
evidence
that
native-to-
prosthetic commissural misalignment may reduce
upper sinus ﬂow by 40% which may increase the
likelihood of thrombus formation, although this hy-
pothesis could not be explored in our patients.6
Previous stroke and new onset AF infer a higher
risk
for
stroke
post-TAVR.
In
the
2
patients
experiencing a stroke, only 1 had a history of stroke,
and none of the thrombotic events were related to
carotid artery disease or new onset AF (chronic AF in 1
patient with left atrial appendage occlusion and no
device-related thrombus or patency). Of note, both
strokes occurred immediately after the procedure,
thus suggesting a procedure-related embolic origin,
with most acute (#24 hours) cerebrovascular events
generally related to the procedure (thrombus, calciﬁc
embolization, endothelium denudation) rather than
to pre-existing comorbidities.1
Low-dose
aspirin
has
become
the
preferred
antithrombotic therapy (over dual antiplatelet ther-
apy) post-TAVR in patients without an indication for
oral anticoagulant therapy. However, observation of
persistent contrast agent retention immediately after
TAVR may prompt close neurovascular monitoring
and consideration for early anticoagulation and sur-
veillance imaging to enable early recognition and
management of ischemic complications. However,
given the limited number of patients and other po-
tential sources for cerebral emboli, these ﬁndings
should be interpreted with caution and remain hy-
pothesis generating.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Drs Asmarats, Millan, and Arzamendi have received proctoring and
speaker fees from Abbott. All other authors have reported that they
have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to
disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Dabit Arza-
mendi, Interventional Cardiology Unit, Hospital de la
Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Sant Antoni M. Claret, 167,
08025
Barcelona,
Spain.
E-mail:
darzamendi@
santpau.cat.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Armijo G, Nombela-Franco L, Tirado-Conte G.
Cerebrovascular events after transcatheter aortic
valve implantation. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2018;5:
104.
2. Cahill TJ, Khalique OK, George I, Kodali S.
Valve thrombosis after transcatheter and surgical
aortic valve replacement: incidence and out-
comes. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2022;163(4):
1309–1315.
3. Lu X, Chen T, Liu G, et al. Relations between left
atrial
appendage
contrast
retention
and
thromboembolic risk in patients with atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2022;53(1):191–201.
4. Vahidkhah K, Barakat M, Abbasi M, et al.
Valve thrombosis following transcatheter aortic
valve replacement: signiﬁcance of blood stasis
on the leaﬂets. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;51:
927–935.
5. Yanagisawa R, Hayashida K, Yamada Y, et al.
Incidence, predictors, and mid-term outcomes of
possible leaﬂet thrombosis after TAVR. J Am Coll
Cardiol Img. 2017;10(1):1–11.
6. Salmonsmith JA, Ducci A, Burriesci G. Does
transcatheter aortic valve alignment matter? Open
Heart. 2019;6:e001132.
KEY WORDS stroke, thrombosis,
transcatheter aortic valve replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental
videos, please see the online version of
this article.
Asmarats et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 2
Aortic Sinus Contrast Retention During TAVR
J U N E 1 , 2 0 2 2 : 6 6 6 – 6 7 0
670
