
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Obstructive Hypoattenuated Leaflet 
Thickening in a Complex Valve-in-Valve 
TAVR Successfully Treated With 
Thrombolysis
Dhan Bahadur Shrestha, MD, a Ashlesha Chaudhary, MBBS, b Unaib Memon, MBBS, b Mustafain Meghani, MD a
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Hypoattenuated leaflet thickening (HALT) is an important cause of bioprosthetic valve dysfunction 
after transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
CASE SUMMARY A woman in her mid-70s developed 1 week of exertional dyspnea and chest tightness 5 years after a 
complicated transcatheter aortic valve replacement in which a migrated 26-mm Medtronic Evolut PRO+ valve was 
snared into the distal ascending aorta, and a second 26-mm Evolut PRO+ valve was placed across the annulus. 
Echocardiography showed severe prosthetic valve obstruction, and computed tomography angiography revealed 
overlapping frames with leaflet hypoattenuation consistent with HALT. She received ultraslow, low-dose alteplase over 
48 hours, followed by apixaban, resulting in marked improvement (mean gradient decreased from 66 to 28 mm Hg).
DISCUSSION Although HALT may resemble structural valve degeneration, it can respond well to medical therapy in 
selected patients with high procedural risk.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Ultraslow, low-dose thrombolysis followed by anticoagulation can safely restore function in 
obstructive HALT when reoperation is prohibitive. (JACC Case Rep. 2026;31:106960) © 2026 The Authors. Published 
by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-
NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
T 
ranscatheter 
aortic 
valve 
replacement 
(TAVR) has revolutionized the management 
of severe aortic stenosis, offering a less inva-
sive alternative to surgical aortic valve replacement, 
especially in patients with high or intermediate sur-
gical risk. As TAVR use has expanded into younger, 
lower risk populations, long-term valve durability 
and complications unique to bioprosthetic valves 
have emerged as major clinical concerns. 1
One such complication is hypoattenuated leaflet 
thickening (HALT), an imaging-defined entity typi-
cally representing subclinical leaflet thrombosis. 2 
Clinically overt transcatheter bioprosthetic valve 
thrombosis is less common (roughly 0.6% to 2.8% in 
general TAVR cohorts), 3,4 but it appears higher in 
valve-in-valve (ViV) TAVR scenarios. A multicenter 
registry of 300 ViV TAVR cases reported a 7.6% inci-
dence of clinical thrombosis, typically occurring
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2026.106960
From the a Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Bassett Medical Center, Cooperstown, New York, USA; and 
the b Department of Internal Medicine, Bassett Medical Center, Cooperstown, New York, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received November 21, 2025; revised manuscript received December 9, 2025, accepted January 14, 2026.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6
ª 2 0 2 6 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
early (median ∼3 months postprocedure). 5 
HALT manifests as reduced leaflet motion 
and may occur in up to 25% to 30% of pa-
tients within the first year after TAVR or 
surgical aortic valve replacement. 6,7 Often 
asymptomatic, HALT can progress to clini-
cally significant obstruction, valve dysfunc-
tion, 
or 
embolic 
events, 
responding 
favorably to oral anticoagulation. 8,9 
We present a rare case of obstructive HALT arising 
from an unusual overlapping TAVR configuration 
created by prior valve migration performed 5 years 
before presentation, which was successfully treated 
with ultraslow thrombolysis.
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A woman in her mid-70s presented with 1 week of 
exertional dyspnea and substernal chest tightness 
that improved with rest. She denied fevers, cough, 
edema, syncope, or palpitations. On examination, 
she was comfortable at rest, with a systolic ejection 
murmur at the second right intercostal space at the 
sternal border, normal S 1 and audible S 2 ; her lungs 
were clear, and there was no peripheral edema. 
Initial troponin I was modestly elevated (218.5 ng/L 
declining to 156.5 ng/L), B-type natriuretic peptide 
was 135 pg/mL, and D-dimer was 744 ng/mL. Elec-
trocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with voltage 
criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy and nonspe-
cific ST-T changes. She was admitted to cardiology 
with concern for prosthetic valve dysfunction versus 
non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, 
empirically starting heparin drip.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
Five years earlier, the patient had undergone trans-
femoral TAVR for severe symptomatic aortic stenosis 
at an outside facility. A self-expanding 26-mm 
Evolut PRO+ valve (Medtronic) migrated supra-
annularly 
during 
delivery 
system 
retrieval, 
requiring transient femorofemoral cardiopulmonary 
bypass, snaring of the displaced valve into the distal 
ascending aorta, and implantation of a second 26-mm 
Evolut PRO+ valve across the annulus. This created a 
tall-in-tall Evolut-in-Evolut configuration, with the 
second valve implanted deeply and the first valve 
frame retained higher in the ascending aorta, result-
ing in a long zone of overlapping self-expanding 
frames (Figure 1). The procedure was further 
complicated by left common femoral artery dissec-
tion and near-transection at the Perclose site, 
repaired with a 6-mm Hemashield interposition graft, 
and primary repair of the right femoral arterial
cannulation site. She recovered without heart failure 
symptoms. Other relevant comorbidities included 
type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipid-
emia, and obstructive sleep apnea.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The leading diagnosis was bioprosthetic HALT, sup-
ported by Doppler gradients, leaflet hypoattenuation 
on computed tomography (CT) angiography, and 
subsequent improvement in gradients after lytic 
therapy. Coexisting structural degeneration/miner-
alization was considered likely given the higher-
attenuation leaflet regions on CT angiography and 
incomplete normalization of gradients. Patient-
prosthesis mismatch was less favored because she 
had previously done well and showed a clear thera-
peutic response to thrombolysis. Infective endo-
carditis was unlikely given the absence of fever, 
leukocytosis, vegetations, or embolic phenomena.
INVESTIGATIONS
Admission transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) 
demonstrated preserved left ventricular size and 
systolic function (ejection fraction >55%), mild 
concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, trace aortic 
regurgitation, and elevated aortic valve gradients in 
the setting of a prior bioprosthesis. Transesophageal 
echocardiography 
showed 
severe 
prosthetic 
obstruction: peak velocity 5.2 m/s, mean gradient 
66 mm Hg, Doppler velocity index 0.18, calculated 
aortic valve area 0.5 cm 2 , and acceleration time 
160 ms (Figure 2). There was moderate mitral
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Obstructive HALT can present late, even 
years after TAVR, in patients with prior 
valve-in-valve implantation and initially 
normal function.
• Valve migration requiring overlapping self-
expanding frames creates anatomical con-
ditions that may predispose to HALT owing 
to altered flow dynamics and incomplete 
leaflet expansion.
• Ultraslow, low-dose thrombolysis followed 
by anticoagulation can safely and effectively 
restore prosthetic valve function in patients 
with obstructive HALT who are poor surgical 
candidates.
• Systemic thrombolysis may be a viable 
nonsurgical strategy in high-risk valve-in-
valve patients when anticoagulation alone is 
insufficient or time-urgent improvement is 
needed.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
HALT = hypoattenuated leaflet
thickening
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
ViV = valve-in-valve
Shrestha et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6
Thrombolysis for HALT After ViV TAVR 
A P R I L 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 6 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
regurgitation, trace tricuspid regurgitation, normal 
right ventricular function, normal left atrial size, and 
no left atrial appendage thrombus.
Chest CT angiography the same day demonstrated
2 prosthetic aortic valves in the ascending aorta with 
approximately 2.5-cm overlap; the distal frame was 
partially oblique, limiting complete expansion of the 
proximal frame at the overlap, and there were vari-
able areas of low attenuation along the proximal 
valve leaflets compatible with thrombus and higher-
attenuation regions compatible with mineralization; 
there was no pulmonary embolus, pericardial effu-
sion, or aortic aneurysm (Figure 3). Noncontrast head
CT excluded acute intracranial pathology before 
thrombolysis.
MANAGEMENT
Given the prohibitive surgical risk for explantation in 
an overlapping ViV construct (prior valve migration,
2 self-expanding frames in the ascending aorta, and 
prior femoral interposition graft), the multidisci-
plinary team pursued a nonsurgical strategy. After 
confirming no intracranial hemorrhage on head 
CT and with intensive care monitoring, the patient 
received ultraslow, low-dose alteplase infusion (no
VISUAL SUMMARY Major Clinical Events With Echocardiographic and Chest CT Findings Showing Overlapping TAVR Valves Mimicking Complex ViV TAVR
Configuration
AVA = aortic valve area; BNP = B-type natriuretic peptide; CC = chief complaint; CT = computed tomography; CTA = computed tomography angiography; 
ECG = electrocardiogram; EF = ejection fraction; HALT = hypoattenuated leaflet thickening; LVH = left ventricular hypertrophy; PVL = paravalvular leak; 
TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography; TTE = transthoracic echocardiography; ViV = valve-in-valve.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6 
Shrestha et al
A P R I L 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 6 0 
Thrombolysis for HALT After ViV TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
FIGURE 1 Model of Evolut PRO+ ViV Overlap Over TEE Image With ViV Construct In Situ
(A) TEE showing valve orientation in aortic long-axis view, (B) modeling of valve with reference to image from TEE, and (C) a model of the 
26-mm Evolut PRO+ valve-in-valve structure to better understand the valve. TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
FIGURE 2
Findings on Baseline TEE Obtained the Day After Hospital Admission
(A) TEE showing the turbulent flow across the implanted valve. (B) TEE showing atrioventricular velocity of 5.2 m/s, valve area of 0.5 cm2,
and mean pressure gradient of 66 mm Hg. TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
Shrestha et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6
Thrombolysis for HALT After ViV TAVR 
A P R I L 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 6 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
bolus) targeting a rate of approximately 1 mg/h, 
continued for a total of 48 hours. On completion of 
thrombolysis, she was transitioned to unfractionated 
heparin. Risk, benefits, and alternatives were dis-
cussed in breadth, involving family members in 
every step. Anticoagulation options, including direct 
oral anticoagulants and vitamin K antagonists 
(warfarin), were discussed. After an in-depth dis-
cussion, the patient chose apixaban to avoid frequent 
international normalized ratio monitoring. Eventu-
ally, she was started on apixaban 5 mg twice daily; 
aspirin was discontinued while on systemic 
anticoagulation.
Her 
chronic 
cardiovascular 
therapies 
were 
continued/adjusted, and cardiac rehabilitation was 
arranged. After treatment, follow-up TTE showed 
marked hemodynamic improvement with a well-
seated bioprosthesis: V max 3.5 m/s, mean gradient 
28 mm Hg, aortic valve area ≈1.06 cm 2 , valve leaflets 
thickened but moving well, and preserved biven-
tricular function.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
Clinically, dyspnea and chest tightness improved 
during hospitalization; the systolic murmur short-
ened, and S 2 became more prominent. Objectively, 
the mean aortic gradient fell from 66 to 28 mm Hg, 
and aortic valve area rose from 0.5 to ≈1.06 cm 2 be-
tween pre- and postthrombolysis studies. She was
able to ambulate more than 1,000 feet without 
symptoms before discharge.
At the 1-week follow-up, she remained asymp-
tomatic at rest, reported only occasional exertional 
dyspnea, and denied any bleeding on apixaban and 
continued to remain on it. She was compliant with all 
medications and awaiting cardiac rehabilitation. 
Repeat TTE at 3 weeks showed a well-seated ViV 
prosthesis with mild paravalvular leak at the 1 o’clock 
position. Hemodynamics were stable with a peak 
velocity of 3.5 m/s, a mean gradient of 30 mm Hg, 
and a calculated aortic valve area of 1.1 cm 2 . Left 
ventricular systolic function remained preserved 
(ejection fraction >55%), with no regional wall 
motion abnormalities or pericardial effusion. At the 
1-month follow-up, the patient remained clinically 
stable and functionally independent. A surveillance 
3-month echocardiogram, followed by a CT angio-
gram, was planned at 6 months to reassess leaflet 
attenuation and valve frame geometry. Thus far, 
she has completed 3 months of follow-up and is 
doing well with cardiac rehabilitation. Her follow-
up echocardiogram at 3 months showed compara-
ble valve gradients and Doppler parameters as in 
prior studies. If she continues to do well, the plan 
is to continue low-dose apixaban after 6 months 
instead of full-dose anticoagulation to avoid the 
risk of any bleeding associated with anticoagulation 
and to prevent subsequent HALT development 
(Figure 4).
FIGURE 3 Chest CT Angiogram Evaluating the TAVR Prosthesis
(A) Coronal section showing well-seated valve-in-valve TAVR prosthesis within the aortic root and ascending aorta. (B) Coronal section showing two 26-mm Evolut 
valves with HALT (arrows). (C) Axial section demonstrating 2 overlapping transcatheter aortic valve prostheses with HALT. (D) Sagittal section showing valve-in-
valve in the ascending aorta across the annulus (arrow). CT = computed tomography; HALT = hypoattenuated leaflet thickening; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6 
Shrestha et al
A P R I L 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 6 0 
Thrombolysis for HALT After ViV TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
DISCUSSION
Our patient developed late HALT 5 years after a 
complicated TAVR in which the initial 26-mm self-
expanding valve migrated and required ViV implan-
tation and femoral graft repair. She presented with 
new exertional dyspnea and elevated transaortic 
prosthetic gradients; imaging revealed overlapping 
valve frames with leaflet hypoattenuation and
mineralization consistent with HALT. Owing to pro-
hibitive surgical risk, she was treated with ultraslow, 
low-dose alteplase infusion for 48 hours, followed by 
heparin bridge and apixaban. Her symptoms and 
hemodynamics improved significantly, confirming 
thrombotic obstruction. In our case, we emphasize 
that ultraslow thrombolysis with subsequent anti-
coagulation can safely restore valve function and 
avoid reoperation in complex ViV TAVR anatomy.
FIGURE 4 Timeline of Clinical Events
AVA = aortic valve area; BNP = B-type natriuretic peptide; CT = computed tomography; CTA = computed tomography angiography; 
ECG = electrocardiogram; EF = ejection fraction; HALT = hypoattenuated leaflet thickening; LVH = left ventricular hypertrophy; 
PVL = paravalvular leak; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
Shrestha et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6
Thrombolysis for HALT After ViV TAVR 
A P R I L 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 6 0
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
HALT has been documented in up to 30% of TAVR 
recipients within the first year, most often subclinical 
and detected on surveillance imaging. 7 However, 
symptomatic leaflet thrombosis is less common, 
occurring in 0.6% to 2.8% of TAVR patients overall, 
with a higher incidence in ViV procedures. 10 In a 
multicenter ViV registry of 300 patients, Abdel-
Wahab et al 5 reported a 7.6% incidence of clinical 
valve thrombosis, often within 3 months of implan-
tation. Risk factors include lack of routine anti-
coagulation, patient-prosthesis mismatch, altered 
flow in the neosinus created by ViV configurations, 
and anatomical constraints preventing full leaflet 
excursion.
In tall-in-tall constructs, the overlap of 2 nitinol 
frames creates a prolonged neosinus with restricted 
washout, promoting stasis. The retained upper frame 
may shield part of the later-deployed valve from 
normal aortic flow, while deep implantation of the 
functioning valve limits leaflet excursion and alters 
sinus vortices. These flow disturbances, reduced 
shear, delayed egress of contrast, and impaired sys-
tolic washout, are recognized contributors to 
thrombus formation on bioprosthetic leaflets. The 
combination of a neosinus physiology and incom-
plete expansion at the overlap zone likely predis-
posed our patient to delayed HALT.
Several case reports illustrate the spectrum of 
HALT presentation and management. Liang et al 11 
described a 77-year-old man with HALT 1 year after 
TAVR who responded to initiation of a direct oral 
anticoagulant with resolution of obstruction. In 
contrast, Aktuerk et al 12 reported 3 ViV HALT cases, 
one of whom required surgical explantation owing to 
dense thrombus and obstruction despite initial 
medical therapy. Our patient’s anatomical chal-
lenges—2 Evolut PRO+ valves with frame overlap in 
the ascending aorta—made reintervention particu-
larly challenging, increasing surgical risk and sup-
porting medical management. Similarly, unlike the 
case reported by Zhou et al 13 where early leaflet 
thrombosis after ViV TAVR in prosthetic valve 
endocarditis led to myocardial infarction and death, 
our case demonstrates successful medical resolution 
of delayed obstructive HALT 5 years post-TAVR using 
ultraslow thrombolysis in a high-risk surgical 
patient.
Thrombolytic therapy is rarely reported for TAVR-
associated HALT, but a growing body of evidence 
supports its utility in refractory or emergent cases.
Chu et al 14 used systemic alteplase in an elderly man 
with cardiogenic shock due to ViV HALT, achieving 
initial gradient reduction. However, the patient suc-
cumbed to unrelated ventricular arrhythmias shortly 
after. 14 In a pivotal report by Patel et al, 15 a high-risk 
woman with severe HALT post-TAVR failed anti-
coagulation and was successfully treated with ultra-
slow thrombolysis (10 mg bolus followed by 1 mg/h 
tissue plasminogen activator infusion over 48 hours), 
with resolution of obstruction and no bleeding com-
plications. Our patient followed a similar regimen 
and 
likewise 
showed 
marked 
hemodynamic 
improvement, supporting thrombolysis as a viable 
bridge or alternative to surgery in obstructive HALT. 
However, because the evidence to guide long-term 
antithrombotic therapy after HALT is limited, our 
plan to continue full-dose apixaban for 6 months, 
followed by a cautious transition to reduced-dose 
therapy, was individualized based on the patient’s 
anatomy, thrombotic risk, and bleeding profile. 
Early recognition and prompt treatment of HALT 
can lead to significant recovery of valve function 
and symptom relief, as seen in this patient. In 
contrast, delayed diagnosis or presentation in 
cardiogenic shock is often associated with poorer 
outcomes, as reported in the literature. The pa-
tient’s successful response to ultraslow thrombol-
ysis contributes to the growing evidence supporting 
this approach as an effective treatment for bio-
prosthetic valve thrombosis, including after TAVR, 
and a potential alternative to high-risk surgical 
reintervention.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge the 
patient and their family for trusting their team with 
the treatment the patient received, and they also 
acknowledge all care providers involved in her care 
during the hospital stay and in outpatient follow-up 
after discharge.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS 
FOR 
CORRESPONDENCE: 
Dr 
Dhan
Bahadur Shrestha, Division of Cardiology, Depart-
ment of Internal Medicine, Bassett Medical Center, 1 
Atwell Road, Cooperstown, New York 13326, USA. 
E-mail: medhan75@gmail.com.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6 
Shrestha et al
A P R I L 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 6 0 
Thrombolysis for HALT After ViV TAVR
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Mack MJ, Leon MB, Thourani VH, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic-valve replacement with a balloon-
expandable valve in low-risk patients. N Engl J 
Med. 2019;380:1695–1705.
2. Makkar RR, Blanke P, Leipsic J, et al. Subclinical 
leaflet thrombosis in transcatheter and surgical 
bioprosthetic 
valves: 
PARTNER 
3 
cardiac 
computed tomography substudy. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2020;75:3003–3015.
3. Latib A, Naganuma T, Abdel-Wahab M, et al. 
Treatment and clinical outcomes of transcatheter 
heart valve thrombosis. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 
2015;8:e001779.
4. Jose J, Sulimov DS, El-Mawardy M, et al. 
Clinical bioprosthetic heart valve thrombosis after 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement: incidence, 
characteristics, and treatment outcomes. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2017;10:686–697.
5. Abdel-Wahab M, Simonato M, Latib A, et al. 
Clinical valve thrombosis after transcatheter 
aortic valve-in-valve implantation. Circ Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2018;11:e006730.
6. Chakravarty T, Søndergaard L, Friedman J, 
et al. Subclinical leaflet thrombosis in surgical and 
transcatheter bioprosthetic aortic valves: an
observational study. Lancet. 2017;389:2383– 
2392.
7. Blanke P, Leipsic JA, Popma JJ, et al. Bio-
prosthetic aortic valve leaflet thickening in the 
Evolut Low Risk sub-study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2020;75:2430–2442.
8. Hansson NC. Leaflet thrombosis after trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement: insights from 
clinical and subclinical cases. Eur Heart J. 
2017;38:1355–1364.
9. Lugo LM, Romaguera R, Gómez-Hospital JA, 
Ferreiro JL. Antithrombotic therapy after trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation. Eur Cardiol. 
2020;15:1–8.
10. Sorysz D, Dziewierz A, Bagienski M, et al.
Early results of the ongoing polish registry of 
valve thrombosis after transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation 
(ZAK-POLTAVI). 
Kardiol 
Pol. 
2020;78:681–687.
11. Liang K-W, Yu C-L, Lin W-W, Lee W-L. Case 
report: leaflet thrombosis after transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement with worsening heart 
failure-a successful resolution using non-vitamin 
K antagonist oral anticoagulant. Front Cardiovasc 
Med. 2021;8:731427.
12. Aktuerk D, Mirsadraee S, Quarto C, 
Davies S, Duncan A. Leaflet thrombosis after 
valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve im-
plantation: a case series. Eur Heart J Case Rep. 
2020;4:1–6.
13. Zhou Y, Fu B, Jiang N, Guo Z. Case report: 
leaflet thrombosis after transcatheter valve-in-
valve aortic valve replacement in prosthetic 
valve endocarditis. Front Cardiovasc Med. 
2025;12:1529523.
14. Chu J, Nath N, Attanasio S. Thrombolysis for 
cardiogenic shock secondary to aortic bio-
prosthetic valve-in-valve thrombosis. Cureus. 
2022;14:e33141.
15. Patel H, Lester J, Essa A, et al. A novel man-
agement to severe hypoattenuation leaflet 
thickening following transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement. Struct Heart. 2025;9: 
100706.
KEY WORDS hypoattenuated leaflet 
thickening, transfemoral transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement, ultraslow 
low-dose alteplase
Shrestha et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 6
Thrombolysis for HALT After ViV TAVR 
A P R I L 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 6 0
8
