
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Snare-Assisted Management of
Nose Cone Entrapment During
Self-Expandable Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Replacement
Vu Hoang Vu, MD, PHD,a,b Thanh Cong Nguyen, MD, MS,b Dinh Hoang Nguyen, MD, PHD,a,c Thang Duc Ho, MD, MS,c
Binh Quang Truong, MD, PHDa,b
ABSTRACT
Nose cone entrapment is a rare but serious complication of transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) that requires
prompt recognition and management to prevent adverse outcomes. A 77-year-old man with severe aortic stenosis un-
derwent TAVR with a 29-mm Evolut R valve (Medtronic). The nose cone became lodged at the distal stent frame as a
result of infolding, caused by a calciﬁed nodule. Standard maneuvers failed, but the complication was successfully
resolved using a snare device deployed through contralateral femoral artery access without damage to the prosthesis.
Few similar cases have been reported. This case underscores the importance of recognizing risk factors such as severe
calciﬁcation, signiﬁcant annular angulation, and large-diameter valves. It also highlights the snare technique as an
appropriate, minimally invasive solution for resolving nose cone entrapment. The snare technique is a reliable approach
to manage nose cone entrapment during TAVR. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103120) © 2025 The Authors. Published by
Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 77-year-old man presented with a 1-week history of
chest pain and dyspnea on exertion. Three days
before admission, he experienced worsening sub-
sternal chest pain at rest, associated with sweating
and palpitations, despite outpatient treatment. On
presentation, he showed signs of acute heart failure,
including orthopnea and an oxygen saturation of 90%
on room air. His body mass index was 27 kg/m2, and
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Early recognition of nose cone entrapment
risk during TAVR is crucial for preventing
life-threatening complications.
 In
the
event
of
entrapment,
avoiding
aggressive maneuvers and using support
devices such as a snare can ensure swift and
effective resolution while minimizing dam-
age to the valve and surrounding structures.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103120
From the aFaculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam;
bDepartment of Interventional Cardiology, University Medical Center Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam; and the
cDepartment of Adult Cardiovascular Surgery, University Medical Center, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received December 5, 2024; accepted December 13, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
no peripheral edema was present. Cardiac
examination revealed a systolic murmur at
the left sternal border radiating to the neck,
along with bilateral moist rales at the lung
bases.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a history of 2-vessel coronary
artery disease, with stents placed in the proximal left
anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery and right
coronary artery (RCA) 2 years earlier. He also received
a
diagnosis
of
severe
aortic
valve
stenosis
but
declined invasive treatment. Over the past 6 months,
recurrent dizziness led to the diagnosis of bilateral
carotid and vertebral artery stenosis, treated with
stenting. Despite these interventions, the dizziness
persisted, culminating in a fall 2 months earlier that
resulted in a left-sided subdural hematoma and ce-
rebral contusion.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The combination of peripheral hypoperfusion, acute
heart failure, and chest pain strongly pointed toward
severe
aortic
stenosis
as
the
primary
diagnosis.
Although atrial ﬁbrillation could exacerbate these
symptoms, acute coronary syndrome remained an
important
differential
diagnosis
that
required
exclusion.
INVESTIGATIONS
Laboratory test results showed a mildly elevated
high-sensitivity troponin T level (30.1 ng/L) and a
signiﬁcantly
increased
N-terminal
pro–B-type
natriuretic
peptide
(NT-proBNP)
concentration
(6,412
ng/L).
Serial
electrocardiograms
indicated
paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation with rapid ventricular
response and left bundle branch block. A chest
radiograph revealed bilateral pulmonary congestion
(Figure 1A). During hospitalization, episodes of atrial
ﬁbrillation were associated with worsening dyspnea,
chest pain, and hypotension.
Echocardiography conﬁrmed severe aortic stenosis
with a heavily calciﬁed trileaﬂet valve, featuring an
aortic valve area of 0.54 cm2, a maximum pressure
gradient of 91 mm Hg, and a mean pressure gradient
of 56 mm Hg. Moderate aortic regurgitation was pre-
sent, with a vena contracta width of 4.5 mm. The left
ventricle showed signiﬁcant hypertrophy and dila-
tion,
indicated
by
an
end-diastolic
diameter
of
59.4 mm and an end-diastolic volume of 167 mL.
Systolic function was impaired, with an ejection
fraction of 44%, and global longitudinal strain was
mildly reduced (15.1%). Diastolic function was clas-
siﬁed as grade II, with an E/e’ ratio (the ratio of the
peak early mitral inﬂow velocity [E] to the early dia-
stolic mitral annular velocity [e’]). of 13.2, along with
mild tricuspid regurgitation and an elevated pulmo-
nary artery pressure of 55 mm Hg (Figures 1B to 1F).
Multislice computed tomography showed no reste-
nosis in the LAD artery and RCA stents, and the aortic
valve calcium score was 4,666. Collectively, these
ﬁndings conﬁrmed severe aortic stenosis as the un-
derlying cause of the patient’s symptoms.
On the basis of the 2020 American College of Car-
diology guidelines (Class 1, Level of Evidence: A),
aortic valve replacement was indicated.1 Given the
high surgical risk (The Society of Thoracic Surgeons
score of 8.39% and European System for Cardiac
Operative Risk Evaluation [EuroSCORE II] of 8.34%)
and multiple comorbidities, the heart team recom-
mended
transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement
(TAVR). Anatomical evaluations of the left ventricular
outﬂow tract, aortic valve, and peripheral arteries
(Figures 2A to 2E) supported the selection of a 29-mm
Evolut R valve (Medtronic). The potential need for
permanent pacemaker implantation was also consid-
ered given the preexisting left bundle branch block
and signiﬁcant calciﬁcation in the outﬂow tract.
MANAGEMENT
The patient’s acute heart failure was stabilized using
loop
diuretic
agents,
nitroglycerin,
and
digoxin,
resulting in symptom improvement, reduced dys-
pnea, and resolution of pulmonary congestion on
chest radiography. On the seventh day of hospitali-
zation, TAVR was performed using local anesthesia,
with ultrasound-guided access through the bilateral
femoral arteries and the left femoral vein. Coronary
angiography conﬁrmed no restenosis in the stents of
the LAD artery and RCA (Video 1), and a temporary
pacemaker was placed. Because of the high risk of
recurrent cerebral hemorrhage, intravenous heparin
was administered at a dose of 70 IU/kg.
A pigtail catheter was advanced into the Valsalva
sinus to assess the aortic anatomy and valve function.
Through a right femoral approach, an Amplatz Left 1
(AL-1) 6-F catheter was positioned at the aortic valve,
and a 0.035-inch straight guidewire was carefully
advanced across the valve. Following this, a pigtail
catheter was used to measure left ventricular pres-
sure and the transvalvular gradient, which showed a
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
LAD = left anterior descending
NT-proBNP = N-terminal pro–
B-type natriuretic peptide
RCA = right coronary artery
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Vu et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Snare Technique for TAVR Nose Cone Entrapment
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 1
Chest Radiography and Transthoracic Echocardiography
(A) Chest radiography demonstrates bilateral pulmonary congestion. (B to F) Transthoracic echocardiography reveals a severely calciﬁed
trileaﬂet aortic valve with signiﬁcant stenosis (maximum velocity [Vmax], 4.77 m/s; aortic valve area [AVA], 0.54 cm2), mildly reduced left
ventricular (LV) systolic function (ejection fraction, 44%), and mild left ventricular strain reduction. ANT ¼ anterior; AV ¼ aortic valve;
C ¼ compression; CF ¼ color ﬂow; CW ¼ continuous wave; EDV ¼ end-diastolic volume; EF ¼ ejection fraction; ESV ¼ end-systolic volume;
H ¼ harmonics; HR ¼ heart rate; INF ¼ inferior; LAT ¼ lateral; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; P ¼ persistence; PG ¼ pressure gradient;
SEP ¼ septal; SV ¼ stroke volume; Vmean ¼ mean velocity; VTI ¼ velocity time integral; 2D ¼ 2-dimensional.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Vu et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 0
Snare Technique for TAVR Nose Cone Entrapment
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
FIGURE 2
Cardiac and Aortic Computed Tomography
(A) Measurements of the aortic annulus, left ventricular outﬂow tract, and aorta. (B) Heavily calciﬁed aortic valve. (C) Aortic valve angulation
relative to the horizontal plane. (D and E) Calciﬁcation in the left ventricular outﬂow tract (yellow arrow). CAU ¼ caudal; CRA ¼ cranial;
LAO ¼ left anterior oblique; LC ¼ left coronary; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; Max ¼ maximum; NC ¼ noncoronary; RAO ¼ right
anterior oblique; RC ¼ right coronary; RCC ¼ right coronary cusp.
Vu et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Snare Technique for TAVR Nose Cone Entrapment
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
mean pressure gradient of 70 mm Hg. Subsequently, a
29-mm Evolut R valve was successfully deployed 2 to
3 mm below the virtual aortic annulus under ﬂuoro-
scopic guidance.
During
device
retrieval,
the
Conﬁda
Brecker
guidewire
(Medtronic)
became
entangled
at
the
proximal end of the stent frame, while the nose cone
of the delivery catheter lodged at the distal end of the
prosthesis (Figure 3A, Video 2). Additionally, infold-
ing of the stent frame was observed at the site of a
calciﬁed nodule in the left ventricular outﬂow tract.
Initial attempts to release the nose cone by using
conventional
maneuvers
were
unsuccessful.
To
address this issue, we used a Multi-Snare device (B.
Braun)
through
the
contralateral
femoral
artery
access. This access site, established with a 7-F sheath,
had been prepared earlier for placement of a 5-F
pigtail catheter to facilitate aortic pressure moni-
toring. The snare device was delivered through a 7-F
Judkins
right
(JR)
4.0
guiding
catheter,
which
allowed precise navigation toward the entrapped
nose cone. On successful engagement, gentle traction
was applied, carefully dislodging the nose cone from
the stent frame without damaging the prosthesis or
adjacent structures (Figures 3B and 3C, Videos 3
and 4). Following its release, the nose cone was
retracted into the delivery system, thus ensuring safe
retrieval (Video 5). The snare and guiding catheter
were then withdrawn, and the 5-F pigtail catheter was
reintroduced
to
resume
aortic
pressure
FIGURE 3
Diagnosis and Management of Nose Cone Entrapment
(A) Infolding of the distal stent frame with entrapment of the nose cone. (B) Use of a snare to capture the nose cone. (C) Successful extraction
of the nose cone from the delivery system. (D) Post-dilation performed using a 22-mm balloon.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Vu et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 0
Snare Technique for TAVR Nose Cone Entrapment
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
measurements. Subsequent angiography conﬁrmed
optimal valve positioning and the absence of device-
related structural damage. Although a moderate par-
avalvular
leak
was
identiﬁed,
it
was
effectively
addressed with post-dilatation using a 22-mm Z-MED
II balloon (B. Braun) (Figure 3D). The procedure
concluded with a signiﬁcant reduction in the mean
pressure gradient to 4 mm Hg.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed no evi-
dence of pericardial effusion and only mild para-
valvular regurgitation. Following the removal of all
catheters and the temporary pacemaker, vascular
closure was achieved with the Perclose ProGlide sys-
tem (Abbott).
FOLLOW-UP
The patient showed marked clinical improvement
following the procedure and was discharged 4 days
later. At discharge, his medication regimen included
dabigatran, rosuvastatin, and heart failure therapies:
sacubitril/valsartan,
metoprolol
succinate,
spi-
ronolactone, and dapagliﬂozin. At 3-month follow-
up, the patient remained clinically stable, with a
signiﬁcant
reduction
in
NT-proBNP
to
170
ng/L.
Transthoracic
echocardiography
conﬁrmed
proper
positioning of the prosthetic valve and showed only
mild
paravalvular
leakage
and
a
mean
pressure
gradient of 3.29 mm Hg.
DISCUSSION
Nose cone entrapment during TAVR, although rare, is
a serious complication with potential consequences
such as paravalvular regurgitation, hemodynamic
collapse, stroke, or cardiac arrest. Management of this
complication is challenging because of limited data
and relies heavily on operator experience. Forceful
maneuvers to release the nose cone can worsen the
situation by
damaging the valve or surrounding
structures.
A review of the literature revealed only 3 similar
cases of nose cone entrapment, 2 managed by post-
dilation and 1 managed by the snare technique.2-4
All cases involved signiﬁcant aortic valve calciﬁca-
tion, pronounced annular angulation, and a dilated
aortic arch. In our case, multiple factors contributed
to the
entrapment, including severe calciﬁcation
without pre-dilation and the presence of a large,
calciﬁed nodule in the left ventricular outﬂow tract
that led to stent frame infolding. The patient’s 55
annular angulation and the use of a large, 29-mm
valve further complicated the procedure.
In many cases, the snare-assisted technique is
essential for positioning self-expanding valves in
difﬁcult anatomical settings by providing traction and
centralization.5 However, in our case, the snare was
used to free the nose cone entrapped between the
prosthetic valve and the calciﬁed left ventricular
outﬂow tract. Post-dilation would have required a
stiff wire and large-bore access, with unpredictable
outcomes, whereas the snare could be deployed
through the existing catheter system, thereby mini-
mizing access-related complications and improving
control. This approach ensured prompt resolution
and reduced procedural risks.
To prevent nose cone entrapment, recognizing and
addressing risk factors are critical to improving pro-
cedural safety. These risk factors include severe
aortic valve calciﬁcation, excessive annular angula-
tion, valve oversizing, absence of pre-dilatation, and
suboptimal device manipulation during deployment
or retrieval. Extra caution is needed when using
large-diameter,
second-generation
self-expanding
valves (29 mm and 34 mm) because they are more
prone to complications such as stent frame infold-
ing.6 Preventive strategies should include consid-
ering pre-dilatation in patients with heavily calciﬁed
valves or prominent calciﬁed nodules in the left
ventricular outﬂow tract, using meticulous valve
sizing tailored to the patient’s anatomy, and per-
forming careful ﬂuoroscopic assessment during de-
vice retrieval to detect early signs of stent frame
infolding. Ensuring that these procedures are con-
ducted by experienced operators is essential, partic-
ularly in patients with high-risk anatomies. In cases
of entrapment, the snare technique provides a reli-
able and effective solution for device retrieval.
CONCLUSIONS
This case highlights the successful use of the snare
technique in resolving nose cone entrapment during
TAVR, offering precise control for a safe and efﬁcient
solution to this rare complication.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Thanh
Cong
Nguyen, Department of Interventional Cardiology,
University Medical Center, Ho Chi Minh City Institu-
tion, 215 Hong Bang Street, District 5, Ho Chi Minh
City, Vietnam. E-mail: thanh.nc@umc.edu.
Vu et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Snare Technique for TAVR Nose Cone Entrapment
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 0
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77(4):e25–
e197.
2. Yokoyama H, Saito Y, Senoo M, Yokota T,
Tobaru T, Tomita H. Successful bailout from the
entrapment of self-expanding transcatheter aortic
valve system caused by the under-expanded
deployed
valve.
Cardiovasc
Interv
Ther.
2022;37(4):751–752.
3. Pyxaras SA, Pizzulli L, Gerckens U. Nose cone
entrapment
after
transcatheter
aortic
valve
implantation of a CoreValve self-expandable bio-
prosthesis. J Cardiovasc Med. 2016;17:e183–e184.
4. Hioki H, Watanabe Y, Kawashima H, Kataoka A,
Kozuma K. Post-dilation from contralateral access
sitefornoseconeentrapmentduringself-expandable
transcatheter aortic valve implantation. PCR Online;
2021. Accessed October 10, 2024. https://www.
pcronline.com/Cases-resources-images/Images-
interventional-cardiology/EuroIntervention-images/
Post-dilation-from-contralateral-access-site-for-
nose-cone-entrapment-during-self-expandable-
TAVI
5. Kunkel K, Fiorilli P, Kobayashi T, et al. Snare-
assisted valve positioning of self-expanding valves
for transcatheter aortic valve replacement. JACC
Case Rep. 2021;3(4):658–662. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jaccas.2021.02.010
6. Ancona MB, Beneduce A, Romano V, et al. Self-
expanding transcatheter aortic valve infolding:
current evidence, diagnosis, and management.
Catheter
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2021;98(2):E299–
E305.
KEY WORDS aortic valve stenosis, nose
cone entrapment, snare technique, TAVR
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Vu et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 0
Snare Technique for TAVR Nose Cone Entrapment
7
