
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE SERIES
Subclinical Delayed Coronary Ostial
Obstruction After Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Replacement With a High-Frame
Transcatheter Valve
Paula Ackermann, MD,a,* Mateo Marin-Cuartas, MD,a,* A. Luise Bayer, MD,b Robin Gohmann, MD,b
Alexandro Hoyer, MD,a Christian Etz, MD,c Mohamed Abdel-Wahab, MD,d David Holzhey, MD,a
Michael A. Borger, MD, PHD,a Thilo Noack, MD,a Suzanne de Waha, MD,a,e Philipp Kiefer, MDa
ABSTRACT
We herein describe 2 cases of subclinical delayed coronary obstruction following transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
Two female patients (74 and 83 years of age) were admitted to our department with acute heart failure due to severe
valvular dysfunction of the transcatheter heart valves (THVs), which had been implanted 38 and 24 months earlier
(ACURATE neo). During THV explantation and surgical aortic valve replacement, a massive circumferential endothelial
growth around the upper crown of the THV prostheses was observed, leading to sequestration of the sinus of Valsalva with
subclinical delayed coronary ostial obstruction. These 2 cases demonstrate a rare but serious complication of the ACURATE
neo THV, highlighting the importance of THV prosthesis selection and implantation technique. In the light of lifetime
management for aortic stenosis and increasing use in younger and lower risk patients, optimal implantation technique and
appropriate THV selection are crucial for patients with small aortic roots, narrow sinuses of Valsalva, and low coronary
ostia. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:104169) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of
Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
PATIENT
#1. A
74-year-old
female
patient
was
referred to our cardiology department because of
acutely decompensated heart failure with progressive
dyspnea. Her medical history included a transfemoral
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) with
an ACURATE neo (size M; Boston Scientiﬁc) trans-
catheter heart valve (THV) 38 months previously.
PATIENT
#2. A
83-year-old
female
patient
was
referred to our cardiology department because of
poor general health conditions, asthenia and adyna-
mia, dyspnea, weight loss, and nocturnal sweating.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104169
From the aUniversity Department of Cardiac Surgery, Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; bUniversity Department of Radi-
ology, Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; cDepartment of Cardiac Surgery, Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock,
Germany; dUniversity Department of Cardiology, Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; and the eDepartment of Rhythmology,
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. *Drs Ackermann and Marin-Cuartas contributed
equally to this work as ﬁrst authors.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received September 5, 2024; revised manuscript received March 13, 2025, accepted April 4, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
The patient had a history of TAVR with
ACURATE neo THV (size S) implantation
24 months previously.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Potential
differential
diagnoses
included
biological valve dysfunction due to structural
valve
degeneration
(SVD),
paravalvular
leakage, and prosthetic valve thrombosis. In
the ﬁrst case, the suspicion of a primary
lung pathology was excluded by thoracic
computed
tomography
(CT).
Another
possible differential diagnosis for the second
patient was prosthetic valve endocarditis, given the
symptoms of weight loss, night sweats, and acute
decompensated heart failure.
DIAGNOSTICS
PATIENT #1. Laboratory tests upon admission were
unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
revealed bilateral pleural effusion, a preserved left
ventricular ejection fraction of 55%, moderate to
severe
transvalvular
aortic
valve
regurgitation
(Video 1), and mild aortic valve stenosis (maximal
pressure 22 mm Hg, mean pressure 14 mm Hg, aortic
valve area 1.8 cm2). In addition, moderate mitral
valve
regurgitation
was
observed.
Thoracic
and
abdominal CT demonstrated severe calciﬁcation of
the
THV
leaﬂets,
with
no
signs
of
infective
endocarditis.
PATIENT
#2. Laboratory
tests
upon
admission
showed increased inﬂammatory markers, microcytic
anemia, and signiﬁcant albumin deﬁciency (C-reactive
protein 96 mg/L, hemoglobin 4.9 mmol/L, albumin
20 g/L). TTE was suggestive of infective endocarditis
of the THV and demonstrated good systolic left
ventricular
function
(ejection
fraction
60%).
Guideline-directed antibiotic therapy was initiated.
Transesophageal
echocardiography
conﬁrmed
the
suspicion of infective endocarditis by detecting vege-
tations on all THV leaﬂets. There were no signs of THV
dysfunction. Enterococcus faecalis was identiﬁed in all
3 blood cultures. The patient developed acute neuro-
logic symptoms, and computed tomographic angiog-
raphy revealed occlusion of the left middle cerebral
artery. The patient was urgently transferred to the
stroke unit and underwent mechanical thrombectomy.
Neurologic symptoms resolved, and the patient was
readmitted to our department in stable condition for
further treatment.
CT
Whole-body CT was performed in both patients for
preprocedural planning (Figure 1). There was no evi-
dence
of
hypoattenuated
leaﬂet
thickening
or
restricted leaﬂet motion. The upper crown of the THV
was located above the coronary ostia with a high
implantation depth. There were no signs of coronary
obstruction.
HEART TEAM DISCUSSION
Both patients’ clinical status and symptoms remained
refractory to conservative medical management. The
multidisciplinary
heart
team
decided
to
perform
TAVR explantation and surgical aortic valve replace-
ment (SAVR) in both patients. Given the intermediate
surgical risk and a high risk for coronary obstruction
because of a small aortic root and the proximity of the
THV’s upper crown to the coronary ostia, redo SAVR
was considered the best option for the ﬁrst patient.
The second patient required surgery because of ﬂorid
infective endocarditis.
INTRAOPERATIVE FINDINGS
PATIENT
#1. Intraoperative macroscopic examina-
tions revealed typical signs of SVD, including leaﬂet
calciﬁcation and excessive endothelialization. We
observed sequestration of the aortic sinus of Valsalva
due to intra-aortic adhesions around the upper crown
of the THV stent, with circumferential contact and
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Self-expanding
supra-annular
high-frame
THVs should be critically considered in pa-
tients with small aortic roots, narrow sinuses
of Valsalva, and low height of sinotubular
junction as well as low coronary ostia to
avoid delayed coronary obstruction and
limited coronary access. When implanted,
the THV should be positioned at low depth in
these anatomies.
 Patients with sinus of Valsalva sequestration
and delayed partial coronary obstruction
may be asymptomatic. However, with the
increasing use of TAVR in younger, low-risk
patients with longer life expectancies, there
could be long-term implications regarding
the lifetime management of aortic stenosis,
including the need for repeat interventions
and potential challenges in coronary access.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
SAVR = surgical aortic valve
replacement
SVD = structural valve
degeneration
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiography
Ackermann et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 5
Delayed Coronary Ostial Obstruction After TAVR
J U L Y 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 1 6 9
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
endothelial ingrowth into the aortic wall. Both coro-
nary ostia were located beneath the upper crown and
were nearly completely excluded, leading to partial
obstruction because of stent ingrowth (Figure 2). The
right coronary ostium was entirely overgrown by a
sclerotic and ﬁbrotic membrane, with only indirect
blood ﬂow through a tunnel-like passage. The ﬁbrotic
membrane was carefully excised, restoring access to
the right coronary artery ostium. After THV explan-
tation, the aortic root was reconstructed using a
bovine pericardial patch, and annular enlargement
was performed using a bovine pericardial patch to
prevent patient-prosthesis mismatch. SAVR was per-
formed using a 23-mm Perimount Magna Ease bio-
prosthetic valve (Edwards Lifesciences). Swabs of the
THV and the intra-aortic adhesions were collected
intraoperatively and sent for microbiological exami-
nation, but no microbial growth was detected.
PATIENT
#2. Intraoperative
inspection
suggested
infective endocarditis of the valve prosthesis. In
addition to the typical ﬁndings of infective endo-
carditis, adhesions and excessive endothelization
were observed in the upper crown of the stent frame.
The coronary ostia were not accessible, because of a
membrane with only small openings. As a result, the
valve was excised, followed by intubation of the
coronary ostia and administration of a cardioplegic
solution. The remainder of the intraoperative course
was uneventful. Intraoperative tissue samples were
collected
for
microbiological
and
histopathologic
analysis, conﬁrming the diagnosis of active infective
endocarditis was conﬁrmed (Figure 3A). However,
microscopic analysis of the tissue between the upper
crown and the aortic wall was not consistent with
infective
endocarditis,
revealing
ﬁbrin
exudate,
granulation tissue, and areas of cicatricial ﬁbrotic
FIGURE 1
Preoperative Computed Tomographic Images of Patient #1 and Patient 2
(A) Patient #1. (B) Patient #2. Asterisks indicate the ostium of the right coronary artery, circles highlight the left main ostium, and dashed lines
mark the upper crown of the THV.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 5
Ackermann et al
J U L Y 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 1 6 9
Delayed Coronary Ostial Obstruction After TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
reendothelialized collagen-ﬁbrous connective tissue
(Figure 3B). SAVR was performed using a 21-mm
Carpentier-Edwards Perimount prothesis.
DISCHARGE AND EARLY FOLLOW-UP
The postoperative course was uneventful for both
patients. TTE prior to discharge showed favorable
results after SAVR. Oral anticoagulation was initiated
for 3 months. Both patients were discharged to
secondary rehabilitation in stable condition, report-
ing signiﬁcant symptom relief and improvement in
quality of life.
DISCUSSION
Preserving coronary ﬂow and access is crucial for both
short-
and
long-term
outcomes
following
TAVR.
Acute coronary obstruction during TAVR is a rare but
critical
complication
associated
with
signiﬁcant
morbidity and mortality. Prevention and manage-
ment of periprocedural coronary obstruction have
been a primary focus of TAVR research, while delayed
coronary obstruction has been scarcely described.
The mechanisms behind delayed coronary obstruc-
tion primarily include thrombus formation and sub-
sequent
embolization,
excess
ﬁbrosis
and
endothelialization leading to sequestration of the si-
nus Valsalva, or late expansion. Clinical presentations
vary, ranging from stable coronary ischemia to acute
coronary syndromes, with or without hemodynamic
collapse.1,2 As demonstrated by our 2 cases, which are
to the best of our knowledge the ﬁrst reports of
delayed partial coronary obstruction after TAVR with
the ACURATE neo THV, patients can remain asymp-
tomatic
regarding
delayed
coronary
obstruction
despite
signiﬁcant
macroscopic
narrowing
ostia.
These observations are incidental, and it is uncertain
how the clinical course of the patients would have
progressed in the absence of SVD and infective
endocarditis. However, as TAVR expands to younger,
low–surgical risk patients with longer life expectancy,
requiring lifetime management of aortic stenosis,
FIGURE 2
Macroscopic Findings of the Explanted Degenerated Symetis ACURATE neo
Valve Show Extensive Endothelization and Adhesions on the Upper Stent Crown,
Near the Typical Anatomical Localization of the Coronary Arteries
FIGURE 3
Microscopic Findings of the Explanted Prosthetic Heart Valve of Patient #2
(A) Microscopic section of the leaﬂets showing ﬂorid ulcerative changes of the prosthetic valve indicative of severe infective endocarditis
(arrow). (B) Microscopic section of the periprosthetic tissue demonstrating ﬁbrosis, reendothelization, granulation, and scar tissue, indicative
of degenerative ingrowth (dashed arrow).
Ackermann et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 5
Delayed Coronary Ostial Obstruction After TAVR
J U L Y 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 1 6 9
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
these cases serve as a cautionary reminder. Both
coronary ﬂow and access can be altered years after an
initially uncomplicated TAVR procedure. Therefore,
caution is advised when using self-expanding supra-
annular THVs, including the ACURATE neo THV, in
patients with small aortic roots, shallow sinuses of
Valsalva, and low heights of the sinotubular junction
and coronary ostia. To minimize the risk for delayed
coronary ostia isolation due to sequestration of the
sinus of Valsalva, it is recommended to implant the
THV at a low depth, ensuring the coronary ostia are
positioned above the protruding upper crown anchor.
However, this approach may increase the likelihood
of requiring permanent pacemaker implantation. An
alternative is to consider intra-annular THVs, as
supra-annular devices seem to carry a higher risk
for
sinus
sequestration
and
delayed
coronary
obstruction.1
The
mechanisms
behind
delayed
coronary
obstruction are not fully understood but may involve
factors such as excess ﬁbrosis and endothelialization
due to increased turbulent ﬂow and persistent low-
grade inﬂammation across the bioprosthesis. This
phenomenon may be more pronounced in supra-
annular
THVs because
of stent frame geometry,
which could contribute to altered hemodynamic sta-
tus and endothelial responses. Furthermore, a sig-
niﬁcant portion of TAVR patients will require repeat
interventions, especially as the indications for TAVR
continue to expand. A second valve-in-valve TAVR
procedure for these patients poses a high risk for
periprocedural acute coronary obstruction or is tech-
nically demanding (eg, requiring a double-chimney
technique),
with
subsequent
adverse
outcomes.
Currently, the prevalence of patients who develop
asymptomatic sinus of Valsalva sequestration and
delayed
partial
coronary
obstruction
remains
unknown.
Diagnosing delayed (partial) coronary obstruction
can be challenging in subclinical patients. CT did not
reveal
pathologic
ﬁndings,
likely
because
of
its
limited sensitivity to detect ﬁbrosis and endothelial
growth, which are key components of the patho-
physiology.
This
highlights
the
importance
of
considering alternative imaging modalities, such as
invasive
coronary
angiography
or
aortography.
Criteria associated with an increased risk are prior
THV commissure level above the sinotubular junction
and a distance of <2 mm between the THV and
sinotubular junction in each sinus.3 These parameter
are, however, only indirect markers, and invasive
imaging adds important additional preprocedural in-
sights in high-risk patients. Given the inability to
intubate the coronary ostia during surgery, percuta-
neous coronary intervention in cases of acute coro-
nary
syndrome
would
have
been
extremely
challenging, with a high likelihood of adverse events.
Finally, in small multicenter registries and case re-
ports, the proportion of female patients appears
relatively high. It remains unclear whether this is due
to
pathophysiological
sex-related
differences
or
anatomical factors.
CONCLUSIONS
Sinus of Valsalva sequestration and delayed partial
coronary obstruction may remain clinically silent and
are difﬁcult to detect with noninvasive imaging,
including CT. Their incidence and clinical impact
remain unknown. Given the expanding indications
for TAVR and the concept of lifetime management of
aortic
stenosis—where
repeat
interventions,
including valve-in-valve TAVR, and the potential
need for acute coronary access are likely—careful
patient and TAVR selection as well as optimized im-
plantation strategy are essential. This is particularly
important in patients with small aortic roots, narrow
sinuses of Valsalva, and low height of sinotubular
junction and coronary ostia.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Borger’s hospital receives speaker honoraria and/or consulting
fees on his behalf from Edwards Lifesciences, Medtronic, Abbott, and
Artivion. Dr Noack’s hospital receives speaker honoraria on his behalf
from Abbott, Edwards Lifesciences, and Medtronic. Dr Abdel-Wahab’s
hospital receives speaker honoraria and/or consultancy fees on his
behalf from Boston Scientiﬁc and Medtronic. Dr Holzhey’s hospital
receives speaker honoraria and/or consulting fees on his behalf from
Edwards Lifesciences, Medtronic, and Abbott. All other authors have
reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of
this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Philipp Kiefer,
University Department of Cardiac Surgery, Leipzig
Heart Center, Strümpellstraße 39, 04289 Leipzig, Ger-
many. E-mail: philipp.kiefer@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 5
Ackermann et al
J U L Y 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 1 6 9
Delayed Coronary Ostial Obstruction After TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Jabbour RJ, Tanaka A, Finkelstein A, et al.
Delayed coronary obstruction after transcatheter
aortic valve replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2018;71(14):1513–1524.
2. Ibrahim H, Chaus A, Staniloae C, et al. Very
late
sinus
of
Valsalva
sequestration
after
transcatheter
aortic
valve
implantation
in
native aortic annuli. JACC Case Rep. 2023;23:
101992.
3. Ochiai T, Oakley L, Sekhon N, et al. Risk
of coronary obstruction due to sinus sequestra-
tion in redo transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment.
JACC
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2020;13(22):
2617–2627.
KEY WORDS biological valve dysfunction,
coronary obstruction, transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
APPENDIX For a supplemental video,
please see the online version of this article.
Ackermann et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 5
Delayed Coronary Ostial Obstruction After TAVR
J U L Y 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 1 6 9
6
