
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Management of a Chronically Infolded 
Self-Expanding Aortic Valve
Sofia Hu, MD, PHD, a Daniel Amponsah, MD, b Sachin Malik, MD, c Patricia Nguyen, MD, b Neha Mantri, MD, b 
Reem Elorbany, MD PHD, b Amelia C. Watkins, MD, a Yihan Lin, MD MPH, a Guson Kang, MD b
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Infolding is a known complication of self-expandable transcatheter valves that typically causes 
hemodynamic compromise. Delayed diagnosis of infolding is rare and can result in premature leaflet degeneration, with 
limited treatment options.
CASE SUMMARY A 71-year-old man presented 5 years after transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) with 
severe intravalvular regurgitation. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed significant infolding of the valve. The 
patient underwent valve-in-valve TAVR, which successfully resolved the aortic insufficiency.
DISCUSSION This is the first reported case of a chronically infolded TAVR, which is a rare but significant complication 
of self-expandable valves. We demonstrate that valve-in-valve replacement can successfully overcome chronic frame 
distortion and endothelialization.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Transcatheter valve infolding does not necessarily cause significant hemodynamic changes, 
which can lead to delays in diagnosis and treatment. Chronic infolding can be visualized by 3D computed tomog-
raphy and can result in premature leaflet degeneration. Structural distortion of self-expandable valves, even years 
after implant, can be overcome with high-pressure valvuloplasty and valve-in-valve replacement. (JACC Case Rep. 
2026;31:107362) Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open 
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 71-year-old man with a history of reduced systolic 
function presented with fatigue and was diagnosed 
with low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis. Stress 
echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection 
fraction (EF) of 25%, an aortic valve mean gradient of 
45 mm Hg, and valve area of 0.56 cm 2 , and he was 
diagnosed with low-flow, low-gradient aortic steno-
sis. Computed tomography (CT) showed valvular
calcification with a maximum annular diameter of 
28.7 mm (Figure 1, Video 1). The patient underwent 
transfemoral transcatheter placement of a 34-mm 
Medtronic Evolut Pro valve. No predilation or post-
dilation with balloon valvuloplasty was performed. 
He tolerated the procedure well, and postdeployment 
echocardiography revealed mild intravalvular and 
perivalvular regurgitation.
The patient was followed up with surveillance 
echocardiography. Initially, the patient’s EF improved
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2026.107362
From the a Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA; 
b Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, 
USA; and the c Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received November 30, 2025; revised manuscript received February 10, 2026, accepted February 11, 2026.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 6
P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R T H E
C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
and left ventricular volume decreased post-
transcatheter 
aortic 
valve 
replacement 
(TAVR) (Figure 2). However, after 1 year, the 
aortic regurgitation progressed from mild to 
moderate. Routine post-TAVR surveillance 
transthoracic 
echocardiograms 
(TTEs) 
demonstrated a gradual decline in EF and an 
increase in left ventricular volumes.
He was readmitted 5 years later after an 
episode of near syncope and was found to 
have increased somnolence and significant 
deconditioning of several weeks.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a history of heart failure with a 
reduced EF, which predated his TAVR procedure and 
subsequently 
improved 
immediately 
following 
TAVR. Echocardiography studies obtained annually 
after his TAVR continued to demonstrate mild 
intravalvular and perivalvular regurgitation. He also 
had a history of right carotid artery stenosis, for 
which he underwent transcarotid artery revasculari-
zation at age 75.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Differential diagnosis included heart failure exacer-
bation, recurrent carotid artery stenosis, recurrent 
aortic stenosis, and coronary artery disease.
INVESTIGATIONS
Initially, workup for cerebrovascular accident was 
pursued, including cross-sectional imaging of the
head and neck, which was negative. Cardiopulmo-
nary causes were assessed, and TTE showed signifi-
cant systolic dysfunction with an EF of 25% and 
worsening aortic insufficiency. Subsequently, trans-
esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was obtained for 
better visualization and showed severe intravalvular 
regurgitation. Significant deformation of the valve 
was also seen (Figure 3). This prompted a review of 
fluoroscopy obtained at the time of valve deploy-
ment, which confirmed infolding of at least 2 nodes 
(Figure 4).
Re-do TAVR options were considered, and CT 
TAVR was obtained for preoperative planning and 
coronary obstruction risk assessment. The study 
showed incomplete expansion of the TAVR across the 
commissure between the left and noncoronary cusps, 
resulting in focal kinking of the bottom half of the 
valve frame (Figure 5). The left and right coronary 
arteries were located at 19 mm and 17 mm, respec-
tively, above node 0.
VISUAL SUMMARY Use Timeline of the Case
Timeline 
Events
Day 1
A 71-year-old man with reduced systolic function (EF 25%) presented with fatigue and was diagnosed with low-flow, low-
gradient aortic stenosis.
He underwent transfemoral TAVR with a self-expanding valve.
Day 2
Post-TAVR TTE demonstrates mild intravalvular and perivalvular regurgitation.
Month 1
Postdischarge TTE redemonstrates mild aortic regurgitation. The valve appears well-seated, and the patient’s EF improved to 
50%.
Years 1-4
Surveillance TTE continues to show aortic regurgitation, which progresses from mild to mild-moderate. The patient’s EF 
progressively worsens, to 32%.
Year 5, hospital 
day 0
Re-presented after an episode of near syncope and was found to have increased somnolence and significant deconditioning of 
several weeks. Workup revealed severe aortic regurgitation.
Year 5, hospital 
day 7
Underwent ViV TAVR with ballon-expandable valve.
Year 5, hospital 
day 8
Post-ViV TAVR TTE well-seated valve with no significant intravalvular leak and only mild perivalvular leak.
Year 5, month 1
Surveillance TTE demonstrates improved EF and stable mild perivalvular leak.
EF = ejection fraction; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement; TTE = transthoracic echocardiography; ViV = valve-in-valve.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Transcatheter valve infolding does not 
necessarily cause significant hemodynamic 
changes, which can lead to delays in diag-
nosis and treatment.
• Chronic infolding can be visualized by 
3-dimensional computed tomography and 
can result in premature leaflet degeneration.
• Structural distortion of self-expandable 
valves, even years after implant, can be 
overcome with high-pressure valvuloplasty 
and valve-in-valve replacement.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
EF = ejection fraction
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiography
ViV = valve-in-valve
Hu et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 6
Management of Chronically Infolded TAVR 
A P R I L 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 7 3 6 2
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
MANAGEMENT
The patient was recommended for and consented to 
undergo valve-in-valve TAVR. As the nitinol frame of 
the patient’s existing TAVR was severely kinked, the 
use of predilation and a balloon-expandable valve 
was planned to overcome the structural deformity 
and enable deployment of a sufficiently large second 
TAVR.
The procedure began with standard transfemoral 
access, including venous femoral access for trans-
venous pacing. The bioprosthetic TAVR was first 
predilated with a 23-mm True Dilatation balloon at 
high pressure (15 atm) while pacing at 160 and then 
180 beats/min (Figure 6A). TEE and fluoroscopy 
confirmed expansion of the valve and resolution of 
the frame infolding. However, there was persistent 
severe intravalvular regurgitation (Figure 6B).
The balloon was removed and exchanged for the 
TAVR delivery system. A 26-mm Edwards SAPIEN 3
Ultra was deployed successfully while pacing at 160 
and then 200 beats/min (Figure 6C). Deployment was 
performed at node 5 to facilitate future coronary ac-
cess. Postdeployment TEE demonstrated no aortic 
insufficiency and mild perivalvular leak (Figure 6D).
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient had an uneventful postprocedural re-
covery and endorsed resolution of symptoms. TTE 
obtained on postprocedural day 1 demonstrated un-
changed mild perivalvular leak. He was discharged 
without complications to a rehabilitation facility and 
then home. At 1-month follow-up, TTE showed 
improvement in systolic function with an EF of 48% 
(Figure 2) and stable mild perivalvular leak.
DISCUSSION
Infolding is a rare complication of self-expandable 
transcatheter valves, occurring in 1% of patients. 1,2
FIGURE 1 Pre-TAVR CT Angiography
Pre-TAVR CT scan demonstrates valvular calcification (A) and annular dimensions (B). CT = computed tomography; TAVR = transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 
Hu et al
A P R I L 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 7 3 6 2 
Management of Chronically Infolded TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
Risk factors include significant calcification of the 
native valve, insufficient predilation, and deploy-
ment of larger valves. 3 In this case, we suspect the 
infolding was caused by a combination of excessive 
prosthesis oversizing and bulky calcification, result-
ing in deformation of the frame upon initial 
recapture.
Commonly, the incomplete leaflet apposition 
caused by infolding results in severe aortic insuffi-
ciency and hemodynamic compromise. 4 When 
recognized early, infolding can be addressed with 
balloon postdilation or valve recapture and replace-
ment. 3 Prior case reports of valve infolding have
demonstrated management at the index procedure 
only. 5
In contrast, the infolding presented in this case did 
not cause significant hemodynamic changes, and the 
patient tolerated the mild paravalvular leak for years. 
Three-dimensional CT imaging obtained 5 years after 
TAVR placement demonstrated how extensively the 
frame can infold without resulting in hemodynamic 
collapse. To our knowledge, this is the first reported 
case of a chronically infolded self-expandable valve 
that was not managed during the initial deployment. 
When infolding is not promptly addressed, asym-
metrical tension and stress on the leaflets can result 
in premature degeneration. Therefore, approaches 
that address infolding during the initial valve 
deployment may not be successful for chronic 
infolding. As evidenced here, valvuloplasty resolved 
the valve deformation but not paravalvular leak, 
indicating irreversible leaflet damage. Following his 
initial TAVR, the patient experienced years of clinical 
stability before his acute-on-chronic decline, and this 
chronicity suggests that progressive leaflet degener-
ation exacerbated the paravalvular leak.
In such cases, valve-in-valve replacement may 
present the only solution. Our successful experience 
with this approach suggests that the self-expanding 
Nitinol frames do not exhibit significant memory 
effects from chronic distortion and can rebound to its 
manufactured shape with valvuloplasty. In addition, 
the frames can be mobilized despite endothelializa-
tion in a distorted conformation and can accommo-
date full expansion of a balloon-expandable valve. 
This case illustrates the percutaneous approaches 
available for structural deformations of self-
expandable valves.
CONCLUSIONS
Chronic infolding of self-expandable transcatheter 
valves can result in premature leaflet degeneration, 
requiring valve-in-valve replacement.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Guson Kang,
3801 Miranda Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304, 
USA. E-mail: guson@stanford.edu.
FIGURE 2 Left Ventricular Dimensions Over Time by Echocardiography
Temporal trend in ejection fraction (EF), left ventricular end-diastolic volume (EDV), and 
end-systolic volume (ESV), estimated using the modified Simpson’s method on 
transthoracic echocardiography. ViV = valve-in-valve; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement.
Hu et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 6
Management of Chronically Infolded TAVR
A P R I L 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 7 3 6 2
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
FIGURE 3
Echocardiographic Doppler of the Infolded Self-Expanding Aortic
Prosthesis
Transesophageal echocardiography revealed severe aortic insufficiency and deformation
of the transcatheter aortic valve replacement (arrow).
FIGURE 4 Fluoroscopic Projection of Infolded Prosthesis
Fluoroscopy at the time of valve deployment demonstrates infolding along the bottom 
half of the valve (arrow).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 
Hu et al
A P R I L 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 7 3 6 2 
Management of Chronically Infolded TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FIGURE 5 3D CT Projection of Infolded Prosthesis
Reconstruction of computed tomography angiography imaging revealed a focal kink 
across the commissure of the the left and noncoronary cusps.
Hu et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 6
Management of Chronically Infolded TAVR 
A P R I L 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 7 3 6 2
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Veulemans V, Piuhola J, Niemela M, et al. 
Incidence and risk assessment of infolding using 
self-expandable devices in TAVR. Struct Heart. 
2022;4:6.
2. Bezzeccheri A, Poletti E, Vermeersch P, et al. 
Prosthesis infolding incidence and short-term 
outcomes in transcatheter aortic valve implanta-
tion using evolut self-expandable device: a 
multicenter study. Am J Cardiol. 2024;221:102– 
109.
3. Musallam A, Rogers T, Ben-Dor I, et al. Self-
expanding transcatheter aortic valve-frame 
infolding: a case series with a warning message. 
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2020;13(6):789–790.
4. Ben-Dor I, Rogers T, Satler L, et al. A word of 
caution using self-expanding transcatheter aortic 
valve-frame infolding. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2019;93:555–558.
5. Karrowni W, Fakih S, Nassar P. Infolding of self-
expandable transcatheter heart valve: case report
and review of literature. Cureus. 2020;12(8): 
e10093.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, stenosis, valve 
replacement
APPENDIX For a supplemental video,
please see the online version of this paper.
FIGURE 6 Valvuloplasty and Valve-in-Valve TAVR
Balloon dilation (A) resolved the infolding of the Evolut valve, but TEE showed persistent perivalvular regurgitation (B). Valve-in-valve TAVR 
was performed with a Sapien 3 Ultra valve (C), which resulted in resolution of the regurgitation (D). TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 
Hu et al
A P R I L 1 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 7 3 6 2 
Management of Chronically Infolded TAVR
7
