
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE: PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS
Bioprosthetic Valve Fracture After TAVR
Complicated by Balloon Rupture
Bail-Out TAVR in TAVR in SAVR
Tiziana Attisano, MD,a Michele Bellino, MD,b Francesco Vigorito, MD,a Antongiulio Maione, MD,a
Amelia Ravera, MD,a Adele Pierri, MD,a Cesare Baldi, MD,a Gennaro Galasso, MD, PHD,b Carmine Vecchione, MD,b,c
Raoul Bonan, MDd
ABSTRACT
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement in surgical aortic valve is a safe and effective procedure to treat patients with
failed bioprosthetic surgical valves at high risk for reoperation. Performing bioprosthetic valve fracture has been shown
to improve postprocedural hemodynamics of TAVR in surgical aortic valve replacement. However, speciﬁc complications
related to valve fracture are becoming more common. (Level of Difﬁculty: Advanced.) (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep
2022;4:1277–1282) © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foun-
dation. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 61-year-old male patient with dyspnea at rest and
asthenia was admitted to our department. Physical
examination revealed tachycardia at 110 beats/min, a
blood pressure of 110/70 mm Hg. The patient had a
body
surface area of 1.84
m2/kg. A
holosystolic
murmur grade 3 followed by a proto diastolic murmur
was heard. Chest auscultation reveled basal bilateral
pulmonary rales. Electrocardiography documented
sinus rhythm with left bundle branch block.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
His past medical history was characterized by coro-
nary artery bypass graft in 2006 and surgical aortic
valve
replacement
(SAVR)
with
a
21-mm
bio-
prosthesis in 2017. The patient also carried treated
high blood pressure, dyslipidemia, chronic kidney
disease stage 3a, and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease stage B.
INVESTIGATION
Transthoracic
echocardiography
showed
a
severe
bioprosthesis
valve
degeneration
with
a
mean
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To treat patients with degenerated surgical
bioprosthesis and high surgical risk through
ViV TAVR, a safe and effective procedure.
 To safely perform BVF in experienced centers
with reduction of high residual gradients
following ViV TAVR due to PPM.
 To avoid PPM at the time of index SAVR,
especially in younger patients.
 To better understand balloon reliability at
high pressure during BVF, with the support
of further research and experience.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2022.07.038
From the aCardio-Thorax-Vascular Department, University Hospital San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d’Aragona, Salerno, Italy;
bDepartment of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, University of Salerno, Baronissi, Italy;
cVascular Physiopathology Unit,
Department of Angio-Cardio-Neurology, IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy; and the dInstitut de Cardiologie de Montreal, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions
and
Food
and
Drug
Administration
guidelines,
including
patient
consent
where
appropriate.
For
more
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received June 29, 2022; revised manuscript received July 21, 2022, accepted July 29, 2022.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 4 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 2
ª 2 0 2 2 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
transvalvular gradient of 51 mm Hg and
indexed effective oriﬁce valve area (EOA) of
0.5
cm2/m2
with
moderate
regurgitation
(Figure 1). Transthoracic echocardiography
also documented left ventricle enlargement
(end-diastolic volume of 96 mL/m2), severe
reduction of the ejection fraction (33%) with
a stroke volume of 22 mL/m2 and an esti-
mated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure of
50 mm Hg. His B-type natriuretic peptide
level was 2,765 ng/mL. The third stage of
chronic kidney injury was also conﬁrmed.
STS-PROM was calculated of 9.2%.
Once the clinical condition was stabilized,
the patient underwent coronary angiography
which excluded new signiﬁcative coronary lesions
and documented all bypass graft patency.1
Invasive transaortic pressure gradient conﬁrmed a
mean gradient of 60 mm Hg with a derived EOA of
0.5 cm2/m2. The patient was evaluated by the heart
team to decide between reoperation vs valve-in-valve
(ViV) transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR).
Computed
tomography
demonstrated
adequate
femoral access for TAVR, valve-to-coronary distance
>9 mm, and a Sino-tubular junction diameter of
25 mm (Figures 2 and 3).
MANAGEMENT
The heart team recommended ViV TAVR using a
supra-annular
self-expandible
23-mm
valve.
The
transaortic
valve
was
rightly
implanted
through
femoral access (Figure 4), but a residual mean trans-
valvular gradient of 31 mm Hg was documented. The
decision was made to perform bioprosthetic valve
fracture (BVF). A 22-mm noncompliant balloon was
inﬂated to 26 atm, as recommended for patient’s
valve type.2 A visible release of the balloon waist was
obtained on ﬂuoroscopy, indicating that the bio-
prosthetic ring had been fractured.3 As described in
the bench side model, for the patient’s valve type, the
mechanism of fracture was probably caused by a
linear dissection of the outer ring of the bioprosthesis
attributable to a single fracture line, the latter not
FIGURE 1
Continuous Doppler on Aortic Bioprosthesis
Continuous Doppler shows a mean gradient of 51.41 mm Hg. AV ¼ atrioventricular; BPM ¼ beats/min; HR ¼ heart rate; VTI ¼ velocity time
integral.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
BVF = bioprosthetic valve
fracture
EOA = effective oriﬁce valve
area
PPM = patients-prosthesis
mismatch
SAVR = surgical aortic valve
replacement
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
ViV = valve-in-valve
Attisano et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 2
Bioprosthetic Valve Fracture After TAVR Complicated by Balloon Rupture
O C T O B E R 5 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 2 7 7 – 1 2 8 2
1278

=== PAGE 3 ===
clearly viewable at angiographic control. Unfortu-
nately, at the end of the inﬂation, despite an expected
balloon
burst
pressure
of
30
atm,
the
balloon
ruptured and was trapped through the just-implanted
valve frame2 (Video 1). After several attempts to
remove the trapped balloon, the last decisive ma-
neuver, although effective, resulted in anterograde
ascension of the newly implanted valve clearing the
coronary ostia (Figure 5). The patient’s clinical con-
dition rapidly worsened with cardiogenic shock and
need for mechanical ventilation in relation with a
severe aortic valve regurgitation. On the wire kept in
place, a second percutaneous 23-mm valve (TAVR-in-
TAVR-in-SAVR) was promptly implanted in perfect
position,
leading
to
excellent
hemodynamics
(Figure 6). A mean transvalvular gradient of 7 mm Hg,
in
the
absence
of
any
aortic
regurgitation,
was
recorded, suggestive for effective BVF as recently
reported in the literature.4 The patient was extubated
before transferring to the cardiological intensive care
unit. Postprocedure hospitalization was uneventful.
After the procedure, left ventricular stroke volume
was 32 mL/m2, and an indexed EOA of 0.70 cm2/m2
was calculated.
DISCUSSION
We presented the ﬁrst case, to our knowledge, of a
ViV TAVR done through BVF of a degenerated 21-mm
surgical aortic bioprosthesis followed by displace-
ment of the ﬁrst implanted percutaneous valve and
massive aortic regurgitation caused by rupture and
entrapment of balloon at the end of inﬂation at
26 atm, treated by bail-out implantation of a second
23-mm percutaneous valve (valve-in-valve-in-valve).
Surgical
bioprosthetic
valve
degeneration
is
a
well-known condition with reoperation rates of z10%
and 30% at 10 and 15 years, respectively.5
FIGURE 2
Computed Tomography and Angiographic Images Showing Relationship Between Coronary Ostia, Surgical Bioprosthesis
and Aorta
(A) Transverse plane at the level of the post of the aortic bioprosthesis obtained from the angiographic computed tomography. Image shows a
correct alignment of the post of surgical valve and coronary ostium. The distance between coronary ostia and valve was >9 mm, indicative of
a low probability of coronary obstruction during valve-in-valve intervention. (B) Aortography performed before the valve-in-valve procedure.
FIGURE 3
Computed Tomography Image at the Plane of
Failed Surgical Bioprosthesis
Transverse plane at the level of valve’s annulus showing that
coronary ostia were not affected by surgical bioprosthesis
encumbrance and testifying a very low risk of coronary
occlusion.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 2
Attisano et al
O C T O B E R 5 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 2 7 7 – 1 2 8 2
Bioprosthetic Valve Fracture After TAVR Complicated by Balloon Rupture
1279

=== PAGE 4 ===
The ViV procedure has emerged as a novel option
whereby a transcatheter heart valve (THV) is implan-
ted within a failed surgical heart valve. However, some
concerns arise, mostly regarding patient-prosthesis
mismatch (PPM), particularly in patients with small
bioprosthetic
valves
(#21
mm)
associated
with
reduced survival.1 In the VIVID registry, 32% of pa-
tients had severe PPM following VIV TAVR, which has
been associated with increased long-term mortality
following both surgical and THV implantation.5
BVF emerged as a novel technique to address this
problem in targeted types of surgical bioprosthesis.
According to the bench tests, the BVF procedure ap-
pears to be effective for sewing ring fracture if a
dedicated pressure of inﬂation is reached.1 In a large
multicenter series, BVF was safely performed along
with both balloon and self-expanding THVs, resulting
in signiﬁcantly lower transvalvular gradients and
increased EOA. In addition, 1-year follow-up after
BVF demonstrates persistent low gradients, no signal
FIGURE 4
Valve-in-Vale Intervention With the Deployment of a Percutaneous 23-mm Valve in a Surgical 21-mm Valve
(A) Predilatation of failed surgical aortic bioprosthesis; (B) percutaneous 23-mm valve deployment.
FIGURE 5
Bioprosthetic Valve Fracture Complicated by Balloon Rupture and Entrapment Followed by Newly Implanted Valve
Dislocation
(A) Bioprosthetic valve fracture resulting in rupture and entrapment of the balloon. (B) Anterograde displacement of the newly implanted
bioprosthesis in ascending aorta.
Attisano et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 2
Bioprosthetic Valve Fracture After TAVR Complicated by Balloon Rupture
O C T O B E R 5 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 2 7 7 – 1 2 8 2
1280

=== PAGE 5 ===
for TAVR injury, and improved survival compared
with historical control subjects.6
As reported by recent metanalysis, after ViV-TAVR
performed with BVF, the difference in means for
mean valve gradients showed a signiﬁcant reduction
(random-effects
model:
26.7;
28.8
to
24.7;
P < 0.001), whereas the difference in means for aortic
valve area showed a signiﬁcant increase (random-
effects model: 0.55 cm2; 0.13-0.97; P ¼ 0.029).
However, despite the improvement in aortic valve
area means, these remain too low (<1.5 cm2) after the
procedure, highly likely caused by the small size of
the bioprosthetic valves implanted during the index
SAVR. This should be kept in mind, also considering
an ever-growing number of patients with obesity.
Even when we change the thresholds for PPM for
obese patients, as suggested by some authors, the risk
of PPM is very high.7 Consequently, the index SAVR
acquires great importance in avoiding PPM.8 If sur-
geons are unable to implant an appropriate valve,
they should resort to surgical techniques to enlarge
the aortic annulus, making sure that the patient will
receive a large valve and will not leave with PPM.9
Furthermore, it should be kept in mind that PPM
is not only caused by the size of the valve chosen
during the index SAVR but also ascribed to patient’s
BSA, and this must be considered on a case-by-case
basis.10
It should also be considered that a series of com-
plications
with
BVF
have
been
described.
Particularly, a case of balloon rupture without clinical
adverse event has been reported.3 In our case, after
BVF performed with a 22-mm balloon caused by un-
acceptable residual gradient, the balloon remained
entrapped in the frame of the bioprosthesis resulting
in its anterograde displacement during the removal
phase. Further research and experience are needed to
better understand the really and safety reliability of
balloon at high pressure.
FOLLOW-UP. At 1-year follow-up, the patient was
asymptomatic, with a mean transvalvular gradient of
8 mm Hg, in the absence of valve regurgitation or
paravalvular leaks (Figure 7). EOA and indexed EOA of
the implanted aortic valve were calculated of 1.61 cm2
and 0.88 cm2/m2, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS
BVF is a novel technique conceived to reduce gradi-
ents
in
VIV-TAVR
procedures
by
fracturing
the
sewing
ring
of
the
bioprosthesis
through
high-
pressure noncompliant balloon inﬂation. BVF can be
performed safely but with caution and expertise,
achieving
reduction
of
high
residual
gradients
following ViV-TAVR. Whether all surgical valves,
regardless of size and residual gradients, should be
FIGURE 6
Bail-out Implantation of a Second Percutaneous
23-mm Valve in the Displaced Valve (Valve-in-Valve-in-Surgical
Aortic Valve Replacement Procedure)
FIGURE 7
Continuous Doppler Through the Inner Aortic Bioprosthesis at 1-Year
Follow-up Showing Normal Mean Gradient
PG ¼ pressure gradient; other abbreviations as in Figure 1.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 2
Attisano et al
O C T O B E R 5 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 2 7 7 – 1 2 8 2
Bioprosthetic Valve Fracture After TAVR Complicated by Balloon Rupture
1281

=== PAGE 6 ===
fractured to optimize transcatheter valve expansion
is currently being debated.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Michele
Bellino, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry,
University of Salerno, Largo Città d’Ippocrate, 1, Salerno
84131,
Italy.
E-mail:
michelebellino8@gmail.com.
Twitter: @MicheleBellino1.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Bapat V, Tang GHL. Fracturing surgical valves to
improve hemodynamics in transcatheter aortic
valve-in-valve replacement: insanity or ingenuity?
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;158(1):72–75.
2. Johansen P, Engholt H, Tang M, et al. Fracturing
mechanics before valve-in-valve therapy of small
aortic bioprosthetic heart valves. EuroIntervention.
2017;13(9):e1026–e1031.
3. Saxon JT, Allen KB, Cohen DJ, et al. Complica-
tions of bioprosthetic valve fracture as an adjunct to
valve-in-valve. Structural Heart. 2019;3(2):92–99.
4. Brinkmann C, Abdel-Wahab M, Bedogni F, et al.
Outcomes of valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic
valve implantation with and without bioprosthetic
valve fracture. EuroIntervention. 2021;17(10):848–
855.
5. Aziz M, Simonato M, Webb JG, et al. Mortality
prediction after transcatheter treatment of failed
bioprosthetic aortic valves utilizing various inter-
national
scoring
systems:
Insights
from
the
Valve-in-Valve International Data (VIVID). Cath-
eter Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;92(6):1163–1170.
6. Saxon JT, Allen KB, Cohen DJ, et al. Bioprosthetic
valve fracture during valve-in-valve TAVR: bench to
bedside. Interv Cardiol. Jan. 2018;13(1):20–26.
7. Sá MP, Rayol SC, Van den Eynde J, et al. Bio-
prosthetic valve fracture for valve-in-valve trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation in patients with
structural valve degeneration: Systematic review
with meta-analysis. J Card Surg. 2021;36(12):
4722–4731.
8. Sá MPBO, de Carvalho MMB, Sobral Filho DC,
et
al.
Surgical aortic valve replacement
and
patient-prosthesis mismatch: a meta-analysis of
108
182
patients.
Eur
J
Cardiothorac
Surg.
2019;56(1):44–54.
9. Sá MPBO, Zhigalov K, Cavalcanti LRP, et al.
Impact of aortic annulus enlargement on the
outcomes of aortic valve replacement: a meta-
analysis.
Semin
Thorac
Cardiovasc
Surg.
2021;33(2):316–325.
10. Sá MPBO, Van den Eynde J, Simonato M, et al.
Valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment versus redo surgical aortic valve replace-
ment: an updated meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol
Intv. 2021;14(2):211–220.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, complication,
echocardiography, valve repair, valve
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Attisano et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 1 9 , 2 0 2 2
Bioprosthetic Valve Fracture After TAVR Complicated by Balloon Rupture
O C T O B E R 5 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 2 7 7 – 1 2 8 2
1282
