
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Live Hemodynamics-Assisted 
Simultaneous Aortic and Mitral 
Valve-in-Valve Replacement
Siddhartha Mengi, MD, Dimitri Kalavrouziotis, MD, Pierre-Yves Turgeon, MD, Jean-Michel Paradis, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Bioprosthetic valve failure is a growing challenge, particularly in high-risk patients who are poor 
surgical candidates. Simultaneous valve-in-valve (ViV) transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) and transcatheter 
mitral valve replacement (TMVR) via a fully percutaneous approach remains a novel and evolving strategy with limited 
data.
CASE SUMMARY A 70-year-old man with failed aortic and mitral bioprostheses leading to severe intraprosthetic 
regurgitation presented with progressive heart failure symptoms. Owing to high surgical risk, he underwent transfe-
moral ViV-TAVR and transeptal ViV-TMVR using the SavvyWire for real-time hemodynamic monitoring and dedicated 
left ventricular pacing. The procedure was successful, with immediate hemodynamic improvement and no 
complications.
DISCUSSION This case demonstrates the feasibility, safety, and efficiency of simultaneous transfemoral ViV-TAVR 
and ViV-TMVR in high-risk patients with bioprosthetic valve failure. Although further data are needed, this case highlights 
a novel application of the SavvyWire, demonstrating its potential to enhance procedural precision, enable real-time 
hemodynamic assessment, and improve safety in simultaneous ViV-TAVR and ViV-TMVR. (JACC Case Rep. 
2025;30:104345) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Founda-
tion. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
B 
ioprosthetic heart valves deteriorate over 
time, with degeneration occurring in up to 
30% of patients within 10 to 15 years of im-
plantation. 1 Although redo open-heart aortic or 
mitral valve replacement remains the standard treat-
ment for bioprosthetic valve failure (BVF), many 
elderly or high-risk patients are deemed ineligible 
due to increased operative risks. 2-5 Valve-in-valve 
(ViV) transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) 
and ViV transcatheter mitral valve replacement
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Simultaneous transfemoral ViV-TAVR and 
ViV-TMVR is a safe and feasible alternative 
for high-risk patients with BVF when per-
formed with meticulous planning.
• SavvyWire enhances procedural precision, 
real-time hemodynamic assessment, and LV 
pacing, optimizing outcomes in complex 
multivalve interventions.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104345
From the Quebec Heart and Lung Institute, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received March 7, 2025; accepted April 25, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N 
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R 
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
(TMVR) have emerged as viable, less invasive 
alternatives, demonstrating favorable early 
outcomes in elderly and high-risk popula-
tions. 6,7 However, managing multiple failing 
bioprostheses 
simultaneously 
presents
unique 
procedural 
challenges, 8,9 
often
necessitating staged interventions. While
previous studies have reported simultaneous
ViV-TAVR and ViV-TMVR via transapical ac-
cess, 10,11 data on fully percutaneous transfe-
moral ViV simultaneous transcatheter valve
replacement (ViV-STVR) with continuous 
transvalvular hemodynamic guidance, to
our knowledge, have not been reported
before. Here, we report a case of successful
transfemoral ViV-STVR using the SavvyWire
(OpSens Medical), highlighting the potential
of this innovative approach in managing
high-risk patients with multiple failing bio-
prostheses and advancing procedural strategies.
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 70-year-old man with a history of dual valve 
replacement performed 11 years ago for infective 
endocarditis of native aortic and mitral valve, with 
Carpentier-Edwards Perimount MAGNA EASE 23-mm 
valve (Edwards Lifesciences) and EPIC 33-mm valve 
(Abbott), respectively, presented with a 6-month 
history of progressive NYHA functional class II/III 
dyspnea, consistent with decompensated chronic 
heart failure secondary to severe central regurgitation 
of both aortic and mitral bioprostheses. Other notable 
past medical history included Parkinson disease, 
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 
45%, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease stage 
II. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated 
reduced LVEF of 45% with mild to moderate global 
hypokinesia, severe intraprosthetic aortic regurgita-
tion (AR) with moderate aortic stenosis (maximal/ 
mean gradient = 50/31 mm Hg, valve area = 0.8 cm 2 ), 
severe intraprosthetic mitral regurgitation (MR) 
(maximal [mean] gradient = 10 [3] mm Hg, valve 
area = 1.5 cm 2 ), and increased estimated pulmonary 
artery systolic pressure at 58 mm Hg with mild 
dysfunction of the right ventricle.
Despite low Society of Thoracic Surgeons scores of 
1.51% and 2.06% for isolated surgical aortic and 
mitral valve replacement, respectively, and the lack 
of specific risk-estimating tools for such cases, the 
heart team deemed conventional redo open-heart 
surgery to be high risk for this patient. Hence, fully 
percutaneous transfemoral ViV-STVR was considered 
as a minimally invasive alternative, allowing for
single-stage treatment of dual pathology, a shorter 
hospital 
stay, 
and 
immediate 
hemodynamic 
improvement, potentially leading to faster symptom 
relief and recovery. 12
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
• Infective endocarditis of the bioprosthetic valves.
• Prosthesis-patient mismatch.
• Thrombus-related BVF.
INVESTIGATIONS
Thorough preprocedural planning was conducted to 
confirm the suitability for percutaneous intervention 
and to predict the procedural outcome. Trans-
esophageal echocardiography confirmed structural 
valve deterioration with severe intraprosthetic 
regurgitation in both valves and no signs of infective 
endocarditis, valve thrombosis, or paravalvular 
leaks. Coronary angiography showed nonobstructive 
coronary artery disease. Dedicated computed to-
mography enabled confirmation of valve dimensions 
and assessment of left ventricular outflow tract 
(LVOT) (Figure 1). Aorto-mitral angle was 61.8 ◦ , and 
calculated neo-LVOT was 673 mm 2 , demonstrating a 
low risk for LVOT obstruction following ViV-TMVR. 
The risk of coronary obstruction was low with vir-
tual valve-to-coronary distance of 10.5 mm on the 
left and 12.5 mm on the right (Figure 1). Additionally, 
the vascular anatomy was favorable supporting the 
feasibility of transfemoral access.
MANAGEMENT
The procedure was started by obtaining all vascular 
access, including the right femoral vein for ViV-
TMVR (as the right side would allow standard 
equipment angulation for the TMVR procedure) and 
the left femoral artery for ViV-TAVR. Preclosure 
technique was used with 2 Perclose ProStyle devices 
(Abbott). Atrial transseptal puncture was then per-
formed using a VersaCross RF system (Boston Sci-
entific), advancing and securing the VersaCross RF 
pigtail wire in the left atrium to ensure future access 
for ViV-TMVR (Figure 2). Systemic heparinization was 
guided by the activated clotting time, and a cerebral 
embolic protection device (Sentinel, Boston Scienti-
fic) was placed via the right radial artery. Following 
predilation of the degenerated aortic bioprostheses 
with an 18-mm noncompliant balloon, ViV-TAVR was 
performed using a 23-mm Accurate Neo2 small (Bos-
ton Scientific), deployed using the SavvyWire under 
rapid pacing (Figure 2, Video 1). The decision to use
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AR = aortic regurgitation 
BVF = bioprosthetic valve
failure
LV = left ventricular
LVEF = left ventricular
ejection fraction
LVOT = left ventricular
outflow tract
MR = mitral regurgitation 
STVR = simultaneous
transcatheter valve
replacement
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TMVR = transcatheter mitral
valve replacement
ViV = valve-in-valve
Mengi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
VISUAL SUMMARY Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and Valve-in-Valve Transcatheter Mitral Valve Replacement Using SavvyWire With Continuous Hemodynamic
Monitoring
(A) Fluoroscopic image showing previous aortic (white arrow) and mitral (yellow arrow) bioprostheses. (B) Valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
(ViV-TAVR) hemodynamic assessment demonstrating improved transvalvular aortic gradients post–prosthesis fracture. (C) Diagrammatic representation of the 
SavvyWire, highlighting its structural components, including the integrated pressure sensor. (D) Final positioning of both aortic (white arrow) and mitral (yellow 
arrow) transcatheter valves. (E) Postprocedural image confirming optimal valve placement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Mengi et al 
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
the 23-mm valve size was made to carefully balance 
the risk of underexpansion (“pin-wheeling”), which 
could result in high transvalvular gradients and 
leaflet dysfunction, against overexpansion, which 
could lead to excessive radial force, annular damage, 
or central AR. The SavvyWire has dedicated rapid-
pacing capabilities and allowed continuous hemo-
dynamic monitoring during ViV-TAVR. Instanta-
neous pressure gradients with the SavvyWire showed 
a mean transvalvular gradient of 26 mm Hg; hence 
immediate valve fracture was performed using 24-
mm noncompliant balloon to optimize procedural 
outcomes (Video 2), thereby successfully reducing 
the mean gradient to 10 mm Hg (Figure 3). Subse-
quently, a 16 mm atrial balloon septostomy was 
performed followed by ViV-TMVR with a 29-mm 
SAPIEN 3 Ultra (Edwards Lifesciences) (Video 3). 
The SavvyWire remained in the left ventricle (after 
ViV-TAVR), providing pacing support during ViV-
TMVR and serving as a bailout option in the event 
of LVOT obstruction, if needed (Figure 2). Hemody-
namics improved dramatically with no increase in 
LVOT gradient measured by the SavvyWire, and 
transesophageal echocardiography confirmed well-
functioning valves with good position and no
paravalvular leaks. The patient remained hemody-
namically stable throughout the procedure.
DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of 
successful ViV-STVR via a fully percutaneous trans-
femoral approach with live hemodynamics guidance 
provided by the SavvyWire for failed bioprosthetic 
aortic and mitral valves. Bioprosthetic valves are 
preferred over mechanical valves to avoid lifelong 
anticoagulation but have limited durability. 13 Ad-
vancements 
in 
valve 
design 
have 
improved 
longevity, leading to their increased adoption in 
younger patients and a consequent rise in failing 
surgical bioprostheses. Whereas the redo dual valve 
surgery carries a significant mortality risk up to 
20%, 14,15 the risk is further augmented in patients 
with heart failure and reduced LVEF, 16 often 
rendering them ineligible for surgery or at risk for 
prolonged recovery or poor outcomes. With the 
widespread adoption of TAVR and emerging trans-
catheter 
mitral 
interventions, 
ViV-TAVR 
and 
ViV-TMVR provide a viable alternative for these high-
risk patients with BVF. 4,17 However, clinical evidence
FIGURE 1 Preprocedural Multimodal Imaging for Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and Valve-in-Valve Transcatheter Mitral Valve Replacement Planning
(A) Computed tomography imaging with measurements of the internal diameter of the bioprosthetic heart valve at aortic position. (B) Three-dimensional rendered 
images showing relationship of aortic annulus with aorto-mitral curtain (yellow arrow). (C) Simulated models with ACURATE Neo2 small (Boston Scientific) virtual 
valve in aortic prosthesis showing low risk of coronary obstruction and easy access post valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement (ViV-TAVR). (D and E) 
Simulated 29-mm SAPIEN S3 Ultra virtual valve in mitral prosthesis with depth estimation related to mitral annulus (red and white circle) to assess procedural 
feasibility, risk of LVOT obstruction, and distance in relation to the aortic annular plane (yellow circle). (F and G) Neo–left ventricular outflow tract measurements.
Mengi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
to guide decision making in multivalvular heart dis-
ease remains limited, as such patients either have 
been not represented or have been underrepresented 
in clinical trials. Furthermore, ViV-STVR for failed 
aortic and mitral bioprostheses remains off-label and 
is not yet included in clinical guidelines owing to 
insufficient data on outcomes. 2,3
In this case, the SavvyWire was instrumental in 
optimizing procedural efficiency, allowing contin-
uous transvalvular hemodynamic monitoring and 
potentially improving overall safety. The SavvyWire 
is a 0.035-inch preshaped guidewire designed for 
TAVR, providing a 3-in-1 solution by enabling stable 
valve delivery, real-time transvalvular hemody-
namic monitoring, and dedicated left ventricular 
(LV) pacing (Figure 4). The guidewire facilitates 
unipolar pacing through specialized conductive and 
insulating features. Pacing is enabled by linking the 
cathode of an external pacemaker to a designated 
connection point on the wire’s shaft, with the 
anode attached to a subcutaneous needle inserted
in the patient’s groin, thereby eliminating the need 
for adjunct devices or additional venous access 
(Figure 4). 18,19 In contrast to traditional guidewires, 
SavvyWire allows continuous transvalvular gradi-
ents assessment, crucial in valve-in-valve proced-
ures where residual elevated gradients are common 
and often require aggressive post-TAVR dilation or 
valve fracture to optimize hemodynamics, as done 
in our case. By eliminating the need for double 
pigtail catheters and multiple transducers, it 
streamlined our procedure while maintaining ac-
curacy and efficiency of the procedure. Addition-
ally, it also served as a safety tool, facilitating real-
time LVOT obstruction assessment (a critical risk in 
TMVR procedures), allowing immediate evaluation 
of LVOT gradients and prompt intervention if 
needed. Furthermore, SavvyWire also serves as an 
emergency LV pacing tool in the event of compli-
cations such as hemodynamic collapse, conduction 
disturbances, or arrhythmias, enhancing safety in 
high-risk scenarios.
FIGURE 2 Fluoroscopic Images of Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and Valve-in-Valve Transcatheter Mitral Valve Replacement Procedure
(A) VersaCross RF Pigtail wire placed in the left atrium following transseptal puncture using the VersaCross RF System. (B) Balloon predilation of aortic prosthesis with 
18-mm Atlas Gold balloon. (C) Valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement (ViV-TAVR) with ACURATE Neo2 small under left ventricular pacing with the 
SavvyWire followed by crossing of the mitral prosthesis under transesophageal echocardiography guidance to gain access to the left ventricle with stiff wire.
(D) Keeping the SavvyWire in the left ventricle after ViV-TAVR for rapid pacing. (E) Interatrial septum predilation with a 16-mm Atlas Gold balloon. (F) Deployment of 
29-mm SAPIEN S3 Ultra valve at nominal volume under rapid left ventricular pacing with the SavvyWire.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Mengi et al 
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FIGURE 3 Playback Interface of the OpSens OptoMonitor During Pre- and Post-Aortic Bioprosthesis Fracture
Valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement (ViV-TAVR) hemodynamic waveforms with SavvyWire pre– and post–aortic 
bioprosthesis fracture (A and B).
Mengi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
The combination of MR and AR represents a com-
mon yet understudied subset of multivalvular heart 
disease, making ViV-STVR procedures particularly 
challenging. In contrast to the surgical approach, we 
opted for ViV-TAVR followed by ViV-TMVR, as 
correcting AR first reduces LV volume overload, 
improves ventricular geometry, and lowers LV 
end-diastolic and left atrial pressures, potentially 
alleviating MR. Whereas simultaneous ViV-TAVR 
and ViV-TMVR may prolong procedural duration, 
increasing heparin exposure and multiple vascular 
access requirements, it eliminates the need for a 
second intervention and its associated risks, making 
it a viable alternative to a staged approach.
A balloon-expandable prosthesis was chosen 
for 
the 
mitral 
position, 
aligning 
with 
the 
prevailing global practice in this setting. 20 For the 
aortic position, a self-expandable (supra-annular) 
valve was selected owing to its superior hemody-
namics, 
reduced 
prosthesis-patient 
mismatch, 
and improved outcomes in small degenerated 
bioprostheses. 21 
Given 
the 
high 
procedural 
complexity and risk, opting for a familiar device 
enhanced safety and efficiency, as demonstrated in 
this case. 
Certain anatomic contraindications may render 
the ViV-STVR approach unsuitable, particularly in 
cases with high-risk anatomic features, such as a
FIGURE 4 SavvyWire: A 3-in-1 guidewire for Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
(A) SavvyWire key components, highlighting its 280-cm length, preshaped tip, pressure sensor (black arrow), and optical fiber. (B) Physical appearance of SavvyWire. 
(C and D) Rapid pacing installation on a patient using the SavvyWire. (E) Periprocedural interface of OpSens OptoMonitor showing hemodynamic waveforms. (F) 
Ventricular pacing using the SavvyWire.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Mengi et al 
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
high-risk of coronary construction and borderline 
neo-LVOT, where leaflet modification or septal 
ablation may be needed before proceeding. Given 
the procedural complexity, ViV-STVR should be 
approached with caution, ensuring flexibility to halt 
at any stage, particularly if ViV-TAVR outcomes are 
suboptimal, or low aortic valve implantation occurs. 
Following ViV-TAVR, LVOT reassessment is crucial to 
identify any hemodynamic changes from baseline 
that may necessitate aborting ViV-TMVR. When 
executed with these precautions, ViV-STVR offers a 
promising therapeutic option for a subset of high-risk 
or inoperable patients who would otherwise be 
managed conservatively.
FOLLOW-UP
The patient had an uneventful recovery with marked 
improvement in symptoms. A mild intra-aortic 
valvular leak, initially detected on transthoracic 
echocardiography, resolved on follow-up imaging 
(Figure 5). He was discharged 48 hours after the 
procedure and showed significant progress at 30-day 
and 3-month follow-ups. Echocardiography obtained 
at 1 month revealed only trace to mild intra-aortic 
residual leakage (Video 4). The patient remains 
symptom-free and active in daily life.
CONCLUSIONS
As transcatheter therapies continue to evolve, 
integrating advanced technologies such as the Sav-
vyWire may help streamline complex procedures, 
reduce complications, and expand treatment options 
for high-risk patients with multiple BVFs. Contin-
uous hemodynamic monitoring enhances safety, ef-
ficiency, and procedural precision. Although the 
successful outcome of ViV-STVR supports broader 
adoption, long-term data remain limited, necessi-
tating further research on durability and single-stage 
vs staged approaches.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Paradis has received consulting fees from Edwards LifeSciences 
and Boston Scientific. All other authors have reported that they 
have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to 
disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Jean-Michel
Paradis, Quebec Heart and Lung Institute, Laval 
University, Chemin Sainte-Foy G1V 4G5, Quebec City, 
Quebec 2725, Canada. E-mail: jean-michel.paradis@ 
criucpq.ulaval.ca.
FIGURE 5 Echocardiography Post-Procedure and at 1-Month Follow-Up
Transthoracic echocardiography evaluation post-procedure showing (A and B) no obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract with mean mitral valve gradient of 
5 mm Hg and (C) mean aortic valve gradient of 16 mm Hg. Transthoracic echocardiography evaluation at 1-month follow-up showing (D and E) no obstruction of the 
left ventricular outflow tract with mean mitral valve gradient persistent at 5 mm Hg and (F) mean aortic valve gradient of 9 mm Hg and trace to mild aortic 
regurgitation.
Mengi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Salaun E, Clavel MA, Rodés-Cabau J, Pibarot P. 
Bioprosthetic aortic valve durability in the era of 
transcatheter aortic valve implantation. Heart. 
2018;104:1323–1332.
2. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: executive 
summary: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association joint 
committee on clinical practice guidelines. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:450–500.
3. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021 
ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of 
valvular heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2022;43:561– 
632.
4. Majmundar M, Doshi R, Kumar A, et al. Valve-
in-valve transcatheter aortic valve implantation 
versus repeat surgical aortic valve replacement in 
patients with a failed aortic bioprosthesis. Euro-
Intervention. 2022;17:1227–1237.
5. Ye J, Cheung A, Yamashita M, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic and mitral valve-in-valve implan-
tation for failed surgical bioprosthetic valves: an 
8-year single-center experience. JACC Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2015;8:1735–1744.
6. Dvir D, Webb JG, Bleiziffer S, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation in failed bio-
prosthetic surgical valves. JAMA. 2014;312:162– 
170.
7. Cheung A, Webb JG, Barbanti M, et al. 5-year 
experience with transcatheter transapical mitral 
valve-in-valve implantation for bioprosthetic 
valve dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61: 
1759–1766.
8. Ruge H, Xhepa E, Joner M, et al. First-in-Man 
simultaneous 
aortic 
and 
mitral 
valve
transcatheter 
implantation 
using 
patient-
customized prostheses. JACC Case Rep. 2021;3: 
653–657.
9. Farjat-Pasos JI, Kalavrouziotis D, Beaudoin J, 
Paradis JM. Simultaneous transcatheter aortic and 
mitral native valve replacement: a step-by-step 
procedural approach. Struct Heart. 2024;8: 
100295.
10. Lutter G, Salem M, Frank D, Puehler T. One-
shot transcatheter double valve replacement: six-
month follow-up-a case report. Eur Heart J Case 
Rep. 2020;4:1–4.
11. Seiffert M, Baldus S, Conradi L, et al. Simul-
taneous transcatheter aortic and mitral valve-in-
valve implantation in a patient with degenerated 
bioprostheses and high surgical risk. Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2011;59:490–492.
12. Ando T, Takagi H, Briasoulis A, et al. 
A systematic review of reported cases of com-
bined transcatheter aortic and mitral valve in-
terventions. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;91: 
124–134.
13. Mylotte D, Osnabrugge RLJ, Martucci GJ, 
Lange R, Kappetein AP, Piazza N. Failing surgical 
bioprosthesis in aortic and mitral position. Euro-
Intervention. 2013;9:S77–S83.
14. Jones JM, O’Kane H, Gladstone DJ, et al. 
Repeat heart valve surgery: risk factors for oper-
ative mortality. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2001;122:913–918.
15. Akins CW, Buckley MJ, Daggett WM, et al. Risk 
of reoperative valve replacement for failed mitral 
and aortic bioprostheses. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1998;65:1545–1551. discussion 1551-2.
16. Mengi S, Januzzi JL Jr, Cavalcante JL, et al. 
Aortic stenosis, heart failure, and aortic valve
replacement. JAMA Cardiol. 2024;9(12):1159– 
1168.
17. Zahid S, Ullah W, Hashem AM, et al. Trans-
catheter valve-in-valve implantation versus redo 
surgical mitral valve replacement in patients with 
failed mitral bioprostheses. EuroIntervention. 
2022;18:824–835.
18. Farjat-Pasos J, Ibrahim R, Sathananthan J, et al. 
Sensor-guided transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment. J Invasive Cardiol. Published online February 
9, 2024. https://doi.org/10.25270/jic/23.00242
19. Rodés-Cabau J, Ibrahim R, De Larochellière R, 
et al. A pressure wire for rapid pacing, valve im-
plantation and continuous haemodynamic moni-
toring during transcatheter aortic valve implantation 
procedures. EuroIntervention. 2022;18:e345–e348.
20. Yoon S-H, Whisenant BK, Bleiziffer S, et al. 
Outcomes of transcatheter mitral valve replace-
ment for degenerated bioprostheses, failed 
annuloplasty rings, and mitral annular calcifica-
tion. Eur Heart J. 2018;40:441–451.
21. Rodés-Cabau J, Abbas AE, Serra V, et al. 
Balloon-vs self-expanding valve systems for 
failed small surgical aortic valve bioprostheses. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022;80:681–693.
KEY WORDS bioprosthetic valve failure, 
SavvyWire, simultaneous transcatheter valve 
replacement, transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement, transcatheter mitral valve 
replacement, valve-in-valve
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Mengi et al 
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 4 5
Simultaneous ViV-TAVR and TMVR With SavvyWire
9
