
=== PAGE 1 ===
SURGERY
HOW WE DID IT
Mitral Valve Repair and SAVR After TAVR
Complicated With Endocarditis and
Mitral Valve Leaﬂet Perforation
Razan Salem, MD,a Jan Hlavicka, MD, PHD,a Florian Hecker, MD,a Philipp C. Seppelt, MD,b Tomas Holubec, MD, PHD,a
David M. Leistner, MD,b Thomas Walther, MDa
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVES We present our surgical management of a mechanical transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
complication of an anterior mitral valve leaﬂet (AML) perforation with infective endocarditis.
KEY STEPS Management consisted of surgical TAVR explantation, transaortic patch plasty of the AML perforation,
patch plasty of an aortic laceration by the TAVR valve, and surgical aortic valve replacement.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS In cases of high operative risk in a technically demanding surgical situation, the surgeon should
aim to operate early and avoid extensive surgical trauma and long operation time by addressing the mitral valve through
the aorta and choosing repair instead of replacement for AML perforation.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Poor positioning of TAVR valves can result in severe structural and subsequent infectious
complications. Early surgical treatment in high-risk older adult patients can be successfully performed, with favorable
outcomes. Scrupulous asepsis and prophylactic perioperative antibiotic therapy are the most important prophylactic
measures for prosthetic valve endocarditis. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103119) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier
on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
P
rosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) is a severe
complication with high morbidity and mortal-
ity rates. With the emergence of transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR), data on PVE after
TAVR are of interest because management and indi-
cations for surgery are not as straightforward as in pa-
tients
without
previous
valve
procedures.
In
addition, the higher-risk proﬁle of the TAVR patient
population must be considered. We report the rare
but interesting incident of mitral valve leaﬂet perfo-
ration complicated by endocarditis after TAVR.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Poor positioning of TAVR valves can result in
severe structural and subsequent infectious
complications.
 Early surgical treatment in high-risk older
adult patients can be successfully per-
formed, with favorable outcomes.
 Scrupulous asepsis and prophylactic periop-
erative antibiotic therapy are the most
important prophylactic measures for PVE.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103119
From the aDepartment of Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital and Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany;
and the bDepartment of Cardiology, University Hospital and Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received October 16, 2024; revised manuscript received December 3, 2024, accepted December 11, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
CASE PRESENTATION
An 85-year-old male patient who was clini-
cally relatively ﬁt presented with mitral valve
endocarditis. Four months earlier, he had
received a 29-mm Evolut valve (Medtronic)
through femoral access to treat severe aortic
valve stenosis. Sizing was determined through
3mensio analysis (3mensio Medical Imaging).
The perimeter was measured at 74.7 mm, with
a perimeter-derived diameter of 23.8 mm.
The left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT),
coronary sinus, and coronary artery mea-
surements are depicted in Figures 1A and 1B.
With those ﬁndings, we decided on a 29-mm Evolut
valve (Medtronic) with no intention of oversizing.
Calciﬁcation distribution of the leaﬂets was rather
asymmetrical,
without
involvement
of
the
LVOT
(Figures 1A and 1B).
During
implantation,
early
interruption
of
the
rapid pacing led to low positioning of the valve
(Videos 1 and 2), approximately 16 mm lower than the
intended annular position. No predilatation or post-
dilatation was performed.
The patient was discharged 4 days after TAVR. The
echocardiogram at discharge showed good TAVR
valve function (mean gradient, 7 mm Hg), without
any paravalvular leakage and a normal mitral valve.
No conduction abnormalities were observed.
At readmission, the patient presented with fatigue
and high fever. Blood test results showed elevated
C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and leukocytes. A
transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed a
vegetation on the anterior leaﬂet of the mitral valve
with consecutive mitral valve regurgitation second-
ary
to
anterior
mitral
leaﬂet
(AML)
perforation
(Figure 2, Videos 3 and 4). The patient’s history did
not identify any exposure to procedures at risk for
bacteremia since the TAVR procedure. Evidence of
Staphylococcus
epidermidis
in
the
blood
cultures
completed the presence of diagnostic criteria for
infective endocarditis (IE). Despite the patient’s age,
he was in good shape and did not experience further
complications. Therefore, the indication for surgery
was agreed on in our multidisciplinary heart team.
His EuroSCORE (European System for Cardiac Oper-
ative Risk Evaluation) II was 5.96%, and his Society of
Thoracic Surgeons score for aortic valve replacement
after TAVR was 5.6%.
The patient underwent cardiac surgery through full
sternotomy under standard cardiopulmonary bypass
(CPB) (CPB time, 118 minutes; aortic cross-clamp
time, 81 minutes), with explantation of the TAVR
valve and patch plasty of a 2 cm  2 cm perforation of
the AML with bovine pericardium (Edwards Life-
sciences) after excision of the infected margins of the
perforation (Figure 3) and extensive debridement. In
addition, a laceration on the dorsal ascending aorta
1 cm above the sinutubular junction and near the
proximal end of the Evolut prosthesis was found
(Figure 4). This laceration was also treated by patch
plasty (1.5 cm  2 cm patch) (Figure 5). After meticu-
lous debridement of the aortic annulus and irrigation
with antiseptic solution, a 21-mm Magna Ease proth-
esis (Edwards Lifesciences) was implanted in a stan-
dard fashion with 12 pledgeted U-sutures. To allow
for tension-free closure of the aortotomy, the aortic
root was enlarged with an additional pericardial patch
at the noncoronary sinus, which was incorporated
into
the
aortotomy
closure.
Intraoperative
TEE
showed good mitral valve function with no signs of
residual mitral regurgitation and good aortic valve
function (Videos 5 and 6).
FIGURE 1
Computed Tomography Measurements With 3mensio Software (3mension
Medical Imaging) Before Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
(A) Asymmetrical calciﬁcation distribution at the sinus level with sinus measurements.
(B) Annulus measurements. Avg ¼ average; LC ¼ left coronary cusp; LCA ¼ left coronary
artery; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; Max ¼ maximum; Min ¼ minimum;
NC ¼ noncoronary cusp; RC ¼ right coronary cusp; RCA ¼ right coronary artery.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AML = anterior mitral leaﬂet
CPB = cardiopulmonary bypass
IE = infectious endocarditis
LVOT = left ventricular outﬂow
tract
PVE = prosthetic valve
endocarditis
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiogram
Salem et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
SAVR After TAVR-Related Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 1 9
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
The patient was extubated 4 hours postoperatively
and was transferred from the intensive care unit to
the general surgical ward on the second postoperative
day. His further postoperative course was uneventful.
Intraoperative culture results and polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) testing conﬁrmed the preoperatively
identiﬁed pathogen (S epidermidis). The echocardio-
gram at discharge revealed good function of the aortic
valve prothesis (mean gradient, 4.77 mm Hg) and no
mitral
regurgitation.
The
antibiotic
regimen
was
agreed on by our multidisciplinary endocarditis board
for 6 weeks of rifampicin and cefazoline. The patient
was discharged to a rehabilitation facility on the 15th
postoperative day.
DISCUSSION
IE after TAVR is a rare yet devastating complication
with a reported incidence of 0.5% at 1 year. It has
been associated with very high early and late mor-
tality rates, with reports of up to 33% early mortality
at index admission.1
Recommendations for diagnosing and managing
PVE following surgical aortic valve replacement are
well deﬁned in American and European guidelines.
However, in the context of IE after TAVR, we face a
challenging patient population that is increasingly
older and at higher risk. Many of these patients were
originally deemed ineligible for surgery.
Involvement of the mitral valve in post-TAVR IE is
reported to occur in 20% of cases.2 This complication
may be promoted either by paravalvular leakage
leading to endocardial lesions on the AML or by low
positioning of the TAVR valve, resulting in friction of
the TAVR with the AML, as occurred in our patient.
Self-expandable
transcatheter
valves
have
been
described as bearing a higher risk for both such
complications.1
In our case, suboptimal positioning of the TAVR
valve led to structural damage (ie, perforation of the
mitral valve), consequently predisposing the site to
endocarditis, as supported by our surgical ﬁnding of
vegetations on the margins of the AML perforation.
Moreover, the distal end of the self-expanding valve
frame caused a laceration of the posterior wall of the
ascending
aorta,
a
complication
that
could
be
explained by the poor proximal position of the valve
in
the
LVOT,
thus
resulting
in
a
poor
overall
alignment.
Having S epidermidis as the causative pathogen in
this case is typical for early PVE, and it suggests a
nosocomial infection. Common sources of bacteremia
include intraoperative contamination and intravas-
cular
catheter
infections.3
Therefore,
scrupulous
asepsis
and
prophylactic
perioperative
antibiotic
therapy are essential for preventing PVE.
Few cases of AML perforation with IE after TAVR
have been reported.1,4 Depending on the extent of
FIGURE 2
Preoperative Transesophageal Echocardiogram Depicting Anterior Mitral
Leaﬂet Perforation With Regurgitation Jet From Deeply Implanted TAVI
FIGURE 3
Intraoperative Finding After Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Replacement Explantation
Transaortic view after aortic valve excision showing perforation
of the anterior mitral leaﬂet.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Salem et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 1 9
SAVR After TAVR-Related Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
endocarditis and involvement of adjacent structures,
surgical treatment may be complex, involving double
valve replacement or reconstruction of the aortomi-
tral curtain or even the aortic root. With TAVR pa-
tients,
an
additional
concern
arises
from
feared
damage caused by explantation of the TAVR, which
certainly depends on the age of the TAVR valve. With
these concerns in mind, the main goals are to remove
and debride as much of the infected tissue as possible
while trying to minimize surgical trauma and time.
Therefore, in our case, we aimed to repair the mitral
valve transaortically, which was performed success-
fully. After explantation of the TAVR, we were able to
visualize the vegetation and perforation of the AML
through the LVOT, and this allowed us to refrain from
an additional left atriotomy.
In some reports, patients with this complication
were treated conservatively with antibiotics because
they were considered high-risk surgical patients,5 yet
the long-term effectiveness of this approach remains
unclear.
For
patients
at
reasonable
operative
risk,
we
recommend early diagnosis and surgical treatment
with complete debridement to avoid local progression
of the disease and further systemic complications
such as sepsis or heart failure.
CONCLUSIONS
Mitral valve endocarditis following TAVI as a result of
poor valve positioning and subsequent perforation of
the AML is a rare complication. This case highlights
the
importance
of
optimal
positioning
of
TAVR
and the feasibility of surgical management of TAVR
complications in older high-risk adult patients.
FIGURE 4
Intraoperative Finding After Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Replacement Explantation
Laceration of the dorsal aorta through the distal transcatheter
aortic valve replacement stent.
FIGURE 5
Intraoperative View of the Aortic Root After
Explantation of the Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Replacement Valve and Native Aortic Valve Cusps
The green star indicates patch plasty of the perforated anterior
mitral leaﬂet. The blue star indicates patch plasty of the
laceration of the ascending aorta.
Salem et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
SAVR After TAVR-Related Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 1 9
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Razan Salem,
Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, University
Hospital and Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-
Stern-Kai
7,
60596
Frankfurt/Main,
Germany.
E-mail: razan.salem@unimedizin-ffm.de.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Amat-Santos IJ, Cortés C, Varela-Falcón LH.
Delayed left anterior mitral leaﬂet perforation and
infective endocarditis after transapical aortic valve
implantation—case report and systematic review.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2017;89(5):951–954.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ccd.26410
2. Amat-Santos IJ, Messika-Zeitoun D, Eltchaninoff H,
et al. Infective endocarditis after transcatheter
aortic valve implantation results from a large
multicenter registry. Circulation. 2015;131(18):
1566–1574.
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCU-
LATIONAHA.114.014089
3. Mahesh B, Angelini G, Caputo M, Xu YJ, Bryan A.
Prosthetic valve endocarditis. Ann Thorac Surg.
2005;80(3):1151–1158.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
athoracsur.2004.11.001
4. Raschpichler M,
Seeburger J,
Strasser RH,
Misfeld M. CoreValve prosthesis causes anterior
mitral leaﬂet perforation resulting in severe mitral
regurgitation and subsequent endocarditis. Eur
Heart
J.
2014;35(24):1587.
https://doi.org/10.
1093/eurheartj/eht503
5. Fotbolcu H, Özdemir R. Multiple anterior mitral
valve perforation after deep transfemoral aortic
valve
implantation.
Braz
J
Cardiovasc
Surg.
2022;37(4):602–604.
https://doi.org/10.21470/
1678-9741-2020-0566
KEY WORDS aortic valve, endocarditis,
mitral valve, valve repair, valve replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Salem et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 1 9
SAVR After TAVR-Related Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis
5
