
=== PAGE 1 ===
NEW YORK VALVES
CLINICAL CASE
Transfemoral Retrograde Transcatheter 
Mechanical Thrombectomy of Massive 
Left Ventricular Thrombus
Chantal Y. Asselin, MD, MSC, Mostafa Naguib, MD, Robert Kipperman, MD, Konstantinos P. Koulogiannis, MD, 
Linda Gillam, MD, Philippe Généreux, MD, Gennaro Giustino, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Left ventricular thrombus remains a clinically significant and under-recognized source of embolic 
complications in patients with left ventricular dysfunction. Transcatheter thrombectomy offers a viable alternative in 
high-risk surgical patients.
CASE SUMMARY A 64-year-old woman with history of anterior acute myocardial infarction presented as a code stroke 
given sudden-onset dysarthria and right-sided facial droop. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed several acute 
infarcts in the left middle cerebral artery territory, consistent with embolic phenomenon. Transthoracic echocardiog-
raphy demonstrated mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 44%, apical akinesis, and the presence of 
multiple large mobile left ventricular thrombi adherent to a papillary muscle and chordal apparatus, the largest 
measuring 2.1 × 2.0 cm. Transcatheter left ventricular thrombectomy using the AngioVac system was pursued using a 
retrograde transaortic approach.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Transcatheter thrombectomy is a safe alternative for patients with left-sided intracardiac 
masses who are at high risk for surgery. Trans-septal or retrograde transaortic approaches may be used for
mass extraction. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105666) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS
A 64-year-old woman presented to our institution as 
a code stroke given sudden-onset dysarthria and 
right-sided facial droop. The patient’s last-known 
well time was approximately 7 hours before presen-
tation, when she developed dysarthria. Approxi-
mately 4 hours later, a family member noticed facial 
asymmetry and decided to bring her to the hospital 
for further assessment.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a history of hypertension, non– 
insulin dependent type 2 diabetes mellitus, and cor-
onary artery disease, with prior infarct to the left 
anterior descending artery requiring percutaneous 
coronary intervention and placement of a drug-
eluting stent 7 years prior. Her surgical history was 
unremarkable. The patient was not taking any med-
ications at the time of admission.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105666
From the Gagnon Cardiovascular Institute, Atlantic Health System, Morristown, New Jersey, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received July 2, 2025; revised manuscript received August 19, 2025, accepted September 10, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis in this patient with 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular comor-
bidities presenting with new neurological 
deficits was suspicious for acute embolic 
stroke. Other pathologies, such as transient 
ischemic attack, venous sinus thrombosis, 
severe migraine, or Bell’s palsy, were also considered 
but were less likely. Microvascular dysfunction was 
also plausible given the history of myocardial 
infarction and lack of secondary prevention medica-
tions such as a statin and aspirin.
INVESTIGATIONS
An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm 
and nonspecific ST-T wave changes. Initial computed 
tomography of the head was negative for an acute 
intracranial hemorrhage or midline shift. Computed 
tomography angiography of the head did not reveal 
any vascular occlusions, significant stenosis, or 
aneurysmal segments. Computed tomography angi-
ography of the neck demonstrated a severe stenosis 
involving the origin of the left vertebral artery. 
Physical examination was remarkable for right-sided 
facial droop with flattened nasolabial fold and 
asymmetric smile. The patient was evaluated by the 
neurology and the stroke teams, and intravenous 
thrombolytics were deferred owing to a low National 
Institute of Health Stroke Scale score and presenting 
outside of the therapeutic window. Routine stroke 
work-up was pursued.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed 
several acute infarcts in the left insular cortex, pari-
etal cortex, and parietal periventricular white matter, 
with a 5-mm area of microhemorrhage visualized in 
the left insula consistent with embolic phenomenon 
in the left middle cerebral artery. Transthoracic 
echocardiography demonstrated hypokinesis and 
thinning of the anterior and anteroseptal walls, 
mildly reduced left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction 
of 44%, and apical akinesis consistent with prior 
infarct of the left anterior descending artery 
(Video 1). Additionally, the presence of multiple large 
mobile LV thrombi adherent to a papillary muscle 
and chordal apparatus were identified, the largest 
measuring 2.1 × 2.0 cm (Video 1). A diagnosis of 
thromboembolic stroke secondary to the presence of 
large LV thrombi was made.
MANAGEMENT
Given the complexity of the case, a multidisciplinary 
discussion 
involving 
the 
structural 
heart,
interventional cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, 
and neurology teams was held. The patient’s 
elevated surgical risk, recent cerebral vascular acci-
dent, embolic risk predicted by clot morphology, 
size, and mobility, as well as elevated thromboem-
bolic risk despite therapeutic anticoagulation were 
taken into consideration. Ultimately, the decision to 
pursue transcatheter LV thrombectomy using the 
AngioVac system (AngioDynamics) with bilateral ce-
rebral embolic protection was made.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The procedure was performed with the patient under 
general anesthesia and with transesophageal echo-
cardiography (TEE) guidance (Video 2). Transfemoral 
access was obtained in the right femoral vein with a 
26-F DrySeal (W.L. Gore & Associates) and in the right 
femoral artery with a 15-F arterial extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation cannula. An initial weight-
based heparin bolus was administered to achieve a 
target activated clotting time of 250 to 300 seconds. 
Serial activated clotting times were monitored 
throughout the procedure. Two Sentinel cerebral 
protection devices (Boston Scientific) were deployed 
from the right and left radial artery in the brachio-
cephalic trunk, left carotid, and left subclavian ar-
teries. A trans-septal approach was initially 
attempted to perform the LV thrombectomy (see 
Figure 1, Video 3).
A trans-septal puncture was performed, with 
advancement of a guidewire into the left upper pul-
monary vein. A septostomy was performed with a 14-
mm Armada balloon (Abbott). Then, a Confida wire 
(Medtronic) was advanced in the LV using an Agilis 
catheter (Abbott). Next, the AngioVac C180 cannula 
was advanced over the wire. Despite multiple at-
tempts, the C180 cannula could not be advanced in 
the LV owing to excessive thrombotic burden. We
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• LV thrombus remains a clinically significant 
and under-recognized source of embolic 
complications in patients with LV 
dysfunction.
• Transcatheter thrombectomy is an effective 
alternative therapy for high-risk patients 
with left-sided intracardiac masses.
• A trans-septal or retrograde transaortic 
approach may be used for transcatheter LV 
thrombectomy.
• A retrograde approach may be preferred 
among patients with very large LV thrombus 
burden.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
LV = left ventricular
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
TVME = transcatheter vacuum-
assisted mass extraction
Asselin et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter Thrombectomy for LV Thrombus 
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 6 6 6
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
then switched to a retrograde transfemoral approach 
(see Figure 2, Video 4). Using an F18 cannula 
(AngioDynamics) from the right femoral artery with a 
recirculation cannula in the left femoral vein, the 
basket of the F18 cannula was introduced into the LV 
and positioned above the mass. After multiple runs of 
aspiration, the mass was successfully debulked.
Final TEE demonstrated a small pedunculated 
thrombus measuring 6 × 5 × 3 mm, which was treated 
with anticoagulation (Figure 3, Video 5). The total 
fluoroscopic time was 105 minutes, and 20 mL of 
contrast was used. Postprocedural imaging revealed 
preserved valvular integrity and function, without 
evidence of valvular trauma, damage, or dysfunction. 
The patient was eventually transitioned to a direct 
oral anticoagulant and discharged from the hospital.
DISCUSSION
LV thrombus after myocardial infarction remains 
associated with substantial morbidity and mortality, 
and its management remains challenging. There exist 
limited guideline recommendations by the American 
Heart Association, American Stroke Association, or 
American College of Cardiology regarding optimal 
treatment of LV thrombus, 1-3 particularly regarding 
the use of direct oral anticoagulants as a potential 
alternative 
option 
to 
traditional 
vitamin 
K
antagonists, predominately warfarin. Currently, 
either agent may be used for 3 to 6 months, however 
the clinical trial data to support this timeline are 
lacking. 1 Additionally, there is a paucity of reported 
outcomes and success of anticoagulation alone for 
patients identified with larger LV thrombi. Further-
more, there is a lack of consensus on the long-term 
use of anticoagulation alone for patients with LV 
dysfunction, who are more susceptible to recurrence 
of LV thrombus.
Recently, transcatheter vacuum-assisted mass 
extraction (TVME) devices such as the AngioVac 
system have emerged as an effective and safe alter-
native to open surgical thrombectomy; these TVME 
devices may be used alongside anticoagulation for 
management of large LV thrombi. These devices have 
been shown to retrieve a variety of intravascular 
materials including vegetations, tumor thrombus, 
catheter- or device-related thrombus, as well as 
intravascular or intracardiac masses. 4,5 The AngioVac 
system was originally designed for the removal of 
right-sided intracardiac masses. 4,5 However, Qintar 
et al 6 published a 10-patient case series in 2022 that 
demonstrated the versatility and safety of the 
AngioVac system in the aspiration of left-sided 
masses. Extracted masses included thrombi within 
the left atrium, left atrial appendage, LV, aortic arch, 
as well as vegetations located on the mitral valve
FIGURE 1 Trans-Septal LV Thrombectomy Attempt
(A and B) Deployment of cerebral protection devices. (C) Trans-septal puncture with the VersaCross system (Boston Scientific) under transesophageal echocardi-
ography guidance. (D) Placement of Supra Core guidewire (Abbott) into left upper pulmonary artery. (E) Septostomy performed with a 14-mm Armada balloon. 
(F) Trans-septal crossing of a C180 AngioVac cannula. (G) Positioning of the outer cannula of a C180 AngioVac within the left ventricle. (H) F18 AngioVac suction 
basket deployed within the left ventricle. LV = left ventricular.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5 
Asselin et al
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 6 6 6 
Transcatheter Thrombectomy for LV Thrombus
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
leaflets; the mean total procedural time was 
192 minutes with successful aspiration, defined as 
aspirating >70% of the material, which was ach-
ieved in 8 of the 10 patients. 6 No complications 
were observed, and bilateral cerebral protection 
devices were used in all patients. 6 Several other 
case reports have demonstrated the successful use 
of 
the 
AngioVac 
for 
left-sided 
intracardiac 
masses. 7,8 Alternatively, Gawaz et al 9 described the 
use of a snare catheter for LV thrombus removal. 
This method was considered by our group, however 
an aspiration device was favored given the adher-
ence of the LV thrombi to the papillary muscle and 
chordal apparatus, which could have been damaged 
by a snare catheter.
We successfully demonstrate the use of a TVME 
device for removal of multiple large, mobile LV 
thrombi using alternative access. As illustrated by 
Qintar et al, 6 a trans-septal approach was favored for 
intervention in the left side of the heart. They 
described a balloon-assisted tracking technique in 
which the AngioVac suction catheter is preloaded
onto the septostomy balloon and used as a dilator, 
facilitating traversal of the intra-atrial septum while 
minimizing blood loss. 6 We initially attempted this 
approach, however the AngioVac suction catheters 
were unable to traverse the patient’s mitral valve into 
the LV, presumably owing to lack of enough support, 
as the Confida wire could not advance to the LV apex 
because of excessive thrombotic burden. In order to 
prevent iatrogenic injury to the mitral valve appa-
ratus, we switched to a retrograde transaortic 
approach. A guiding catheter was used to cross the 
aortic valve into the LV. This was exchanged for a 
guidewire, which acted as a rail for the AngioVac 
catheter to traverse into the LV across the aortic 
valve. Given the risk of incomplete mass removal, we 
recommend that cerebral protection devices be used 
in cases with high embolic burden or thrombus 
manipulation. Considerations for anatomical con-
straints, device design limitations, and ventricular 
geometry should also be discussed prior to the pro-
cedure if alternative access or different devices are 
required, as was the case for our patient.
FIGURE 2 Transfemoral Retrograde Transcatheter Mechanical Thrombectomy Technique
Multiple views on transesophageal echocardiography of the F18 AngioVac cannula accessing the left ventricle through the left ventricular 
outflow tract.
Asselin et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter Thrombectomy for LV Thrombus 
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 6 6 6
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS. A transfemoral
retrograde approach for LV thrombectomy has 
several strengths. First, this approach eliminates the 
need for trans-septal puncture, which may lead to 
intracardiac shunt requiring percutaneous or surgical 
closure postseptostomy. Second, it provides an 
alternative approach to access the LV that negates 
having to traverse the mitral valve, which may 
induce iatrogenic damage to the mitral valve appa-
ratus, leading to mitral regurgitation. Third, the 
funnel of the F18 cannula is located within the LV 
outflow tract, possibly preventing systemic emboli-
zation of material. Lastly, the trajectory achieved by 
the transfemoral retrograde approach conforms to 
the natural anatomy and positioning of the LV cavity, 
which may facilitate aspiration of thrombotic 
contents.
There are several limitations to this approach. 
First, the working length of the F18 cannula (Angio-
Dynamics) is 105 cm. Our patient was a short woman 
of 165 cm, however in taller patients, the F18 cannula 
may not be long enough to reach the LV. Second, 
large-bore arterial access of at least 22 F is required to 
accommodate the F18 cannula. This access should be 
obtained by an experienced provider, with the pre-
closure device placed before dilation of the vessel to
minimize risk of vascular injury or major bleeding. 
Next, the transfemoral retrograde approach requires 
the large F18 cannula to traverse the aortic valve. If 
not performed with caution and under TEE guidance, 
it could cause iatrogenic damage of the aortic valve 
apparatus, leading to hemodynamic collapse. Lastly, 
delivery of the F18 apparatus through the thoracic 
and ascending aorta could dislodge atherosclerotic 
plaques, leading to ischemia. We recommend a 
strategy of bilateral embolic protection, however this 
does not prevent peripheral or visceral ischemia.
CONCLUSIONS
LV thrombus remains a clinically significant and 
under-recognized source of embolic complications 
in patients with LV dysfunction. Transcatheter 
thrombectomy offers a viable alternative treatment 
strategy in patients at high surgical risk. Both 
trans-septal or retrograde transaortic approaches 
may be used, however a retrograde approach may 
be preferred among patients with very large LV 
thrombus burden.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge all 
of the health care workers and ancillary hospital staff 
who were involved in the care of the patient.
FIGURE 3 Transesophageal Echocardiography Images of Multiple Large LV Thrombi Before and After LV Thrombectomy
(A) Two-dimensional imaging, (B) color Doppler, and (C) three-dimensional imaging before LV thrombectomy. (D) Two-dimensional imaging, (E) color Doppler, and 
(F) three-dimensional imaging after LV thrombectomy. LV = left ventricular.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5 
Asselin et al
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 6 6 6 
Transcatheter Thrombectomy for LV Thrombus
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Koulogiannis has been a consultant for Edwards Lifesciences and 
Medtronic. Dr Gillam has been an advisor to Medtronic, Philips, and 
Egnite. Dr Genereux has received institutional research grants from 
Edwards Lifesciences; consulting fees from Abbott, Cordis, Edwards 
Lifesciences, Egnite, Haemonetics, Medtronic, Opsens, Puzzle Med-
ical, Pi-Cardia, and 4C medical; holds equity in Puzzle Medical and 
Pi-Cardia; and was the principal investigator of the EARLY TAVR 
trial, and the PROGRESS trial, both sponsored by Edwards
Lifesciences. Dr Giustino has been a proctor and consultant for 
Edwards Lifesciences. The authors have reported that they have no 
relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Gennaro
Giustino, Valve and Structural Heart Center, Gagnon 
Cardiovascular Institute, Atlantic Health System, 100 
Madison Avenue, Morristown, New Jersey 07960, 
USA. E-mail: gennaro.giustino@atlantichealth.org.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Levine GN, McEvoy JW, Fang JC, et al. Man-
agement of patients at risk for and with left 
ventricular thrombus: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2022;146:e205–e223.
2. O’Gara P, Kushner F, Ascheim D, et al. 
2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the management 
of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation/American Heart Association task 
force on practice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61(4):e78–e140.
3. Kleindorfer DO, Towfighi A, Chaturvedi S, et al. 
2021 Guideline for the prevention of stroke in 
patients with stroke and transient ischemic 
attack: a guideline from the American Heart As-
sociation/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2021;52:e364–e467.
4. Katapadi 
A, 
Richards 
L, 
Fischer 
W, 
Allaqaband SQ, Bajwa T, Jan MF. Endovascular 
treatment of right heart masses utilizing the 
AngioVac system: a 6-year single-center observa-
tional study. J Interv Cardiol. 2021;2021:9923440.
5. Mullins JB, Warner A, Patel VS, Arora V. 
A retrospective analysis of AngioVac outcomes at 
a Tertiary Care Center. J Soc Cardiovasc Angiogr 
Interv. 2024;3:101979.
6. Qintar M, Wang DD, Lee J, et al. Transcatheter 
vacuum-assisted left-sided mass extraction with 
the AngioVac system. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2022;100:628–635.
7. Gerosa G, Longinotti L, Bagozzi L, et al. 
Transapical aspiration of a mitral mass with the 
AngioVac system on a beating heart. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2020;110:e445–e447.
8. Stimpfle F, Müller K, Geisler T, et al. Throm-
boembolic risk reduction via transseptal thrombus 
aspiration in a patient with spontaneous left atrial 
thrombus and stroke. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2017;10:e57–e59.
9. Gawaz MP, Schreieck J, Lydia Mueller KA, 
Geisler T. Interventional removal of LV thrombus 
in a patient with cardiogenic shock and transitory 
ischemic attack. JACC Case Rep. 2023;15:101860.
KEY WORDS alternative access, 
mechanical thrombectomy, transcatheter 
vacuum-assisted mass extraction
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Asselin et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter Thrombectomy for LV Thrombus 
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 6 6 6
6
