
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Acute Occlusion of Right Coronary 
Artery During Transcatheter Aortic Valve 
Replacement of a Bicuspid Valve
Yousuke Taniguchi, MD, a Anna Lena Lahmann, MD, a Hector A. Alvarez-Covarrubias, MD, MSC, PHD, a 
Salvatore Cassese, MD, a Erion Xhepa, MD, a Massimiliano Fusaro, MD, a Michael Joner, MD a,b
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Coronary artery occlusion following transcatheter aortic valve replacement is a severe complication.
CASE SUMMARY We present a case of coronary artery occlusion that occurred unexpectedly despite thorough pre-
procedural planning under the anatomically unique condition of a bicuspid aortic valve. Several factors that warrant 
reconsideration during preprocedural planning became clearer through the case analysis and subsequent autopsy 
findings.
DISCUSSION Despite best practice in preprocedural planning, exact simulation of procedural work flow and precise 
risk assessment remains restricted owing to patient-specific anatomical and functional characteristics not amenable to 
preprocedural projection.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES When transcatheter aortic valve replacement is performed in the setting of a bicuspid aortic 
valve, coronary artery–related complications may be at increased risk for failed percutaneous bailout procedures. When 
assessing the risk of coronary artery occlusion in bicuspid aortic valves, it is important to consider not only coronary 
artery height, but also the distribution of calcification. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105313) © 2025 The Authors. 
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article 
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION AND 
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
A 75-year-old patient with severe aortic stenosis was 
scheduled for transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (TAVR) owing to the increased surgical 
risk of reoperation after prior coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery (saphenous venous graft–distal left
anterior descending coronary artery, right internal 
thoracic artery–proximal left anterior descending 
coronary artery, left internal thoracic artery–left 
circumflex artery). The patient’s Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality score was 
calculated as 7.45%. This case received ethical 
approval from the ethical review committee of 
Technische Universität München.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105313
From the a Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Diseases, German Heart Center Munich, Technical University Munich 
University Hospital, Munich, Germany; and the b Deutsches Zentrum für Herz- und Kreislauf-Forschung (DZHK) e.V. (German 
Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received March 27, 2025; revised manuscript received June 27, 2025, accepted July 14, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 0 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
INVESTIGATIONS
Multislice computed tomography for assess-
ment of the aortic annulus measurements in 
multiple plane reconstructions revealed a 
right-left Sievers type 1 bicuspid aortic valve, 
and the density of the raphe was calculated as 1,207 
Hounsfield units (Figure 1). Multislice computed to-
mography also revealed that the left ventricular 
outflow tract area was 521 mm 2 , annulus area was 
548 mm 2 , annulus perimeter was 84 mm, right cor-
onary height was 15.5 mm, and left coronary height 
was 11.5 mm (Figures 2A to 2F). The calcium volume 
was calculated at 2,165 mm 3 (1,107 mm 3 [51.1% of 
total] calcium volume was seen on the right coronary 
cusp) (Figures 3A and 3B). Coronary angiography 
showed moderate stenosis in the middle and distal 
right coronary artery (RCA); however, the proximal 
RCA had no severe stenosis (Video 1). Simulation of a 
26-mm Sapien 3 with circle method was performed. 
The simulation revealed sufficient space at the 
annulus and sinus of Valsalva level and sufficient 
height of the RCA relative to the aortic annulus 
(Figures 4A to 4D, Video 2). All measurements and
simulation were performed by 3mensio (Pie Medical 
Imaging BV).
MANAGEMENT
TAVR was performed via a transfemoral approach. 
Predilation with a 25-mm balloon was conducted, 
also serving as annular sizing, and a 26-mm Sapien 3 
(Edwards Lifesciences) was selected and successfully 
implanted (Videos 3A and 3B). The procedure was 
completed after confirming a mild paravalvular leak, 
and the patient was transferred to the intensive care 
unit for further monitoring. However, the first elec-
trocardiogram after the procedure showed ST-
segment elevation of the posterior wall and severely 
impaired function of the right ventricle on 
echocardiography.
The patient was immediately transferred to the 
catheterization laboratory, and a coronary angiogram 
revealed total occlusion of the RCA (Figure 5, 
Video 4A). Multiple attempts to recanalize the vessel 
failed. At the same time, RCA flow had recovered to 
TIMI flow grade 2 (Video 4B). ST-segment elevation 
had also improved to the baseline. In addition, owing 
to the upper limitation on the amount of contrast 
agent, it was decided to stabilize the patient in the 
intensive care unit and opt for a second-look 
strategy. Within 3 hours, no re-elevation of the ST-
segment was noted. However, as hypotension and 
hypoxia remained refractory necessitating ongoing 
catecholamine support and mechanical ventilation, 
the treating interventional cardiologists decided to 
implant extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO) as a backup for a reattempt of recanalization. 
After straightforward ECMO implantation, coro-
nary angiography of the RCA was performed, which 
paradoxically showed TIMI flow grade 3 of the RCA. 
However, it was impossible to cross the ostia of the 
RCA with any coronary guidewires (Video 5). 
Despite best practice intensive care for several days, 
the patient’s condition deteriorated, and the patient 
died.
FIGURE 1 Morphology of Bicuspid Valve
Multislice computed tomography showing the right-left Sievers type 1 calcified bicuspid 
aortic valve before the procedure. Asterisks indicate raphe between right and left 
coronary cusps. LC = left coronary cusp; NC = noncoronary cusp; RC = right coronary 
cusp.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• When TAVR is performed in the setting of a 
bicuspid aortic valve, coronary artery-
related complications may be at increased 
risk for failed percutaneous bailout 
procedures.
• When assessing the risk of coronary artery 
occlusion in bicuspid aortic valves, it is 
important to consider not only coronary 
artery height, but also the distribution of 
calcification.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
RCA = right coronary artery
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Taniguchi et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 0 , 2 0 2 5
Acute Coronary Occlusion During Bicuspid TAVR 
O C T O B E R 1 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 1 3
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 2 Preprocedural Assessment of Annulus Anatomy
Multislice computed tomography showing the area and perimeter at the level of left ventricular outflow track (A), annulus (B), Valsalva sinus (C), and sinotubular 
junction (D). Right (E) and left (F) coronary heights were also estimated.
FIGURE 3 Distribution of Calcium on Each Coronary Cusp
(A) Multislice computed tomography (horizontal view) showing calcium distribution according to each coronary cusp. Yellow shows 
distribution of calcium on the right coronary cusp, purple shows calcium distribution on the left coronary cusp, and blue shows calcium 
distribution on the noncoronary cusp. (B) Multislice computed tomography (three-dimensional reconstruction) showing calcium distribution 
according to each coronary cusp. Yellow shows distribution of calcium on the right coronary cusp, purple shows calcium distribution on the 
left coronary cusp, and blue shows calcium distribution on the noncoronary cusp. Abbreviations as in Figure 1.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 
Taniguchi et al
O C T O B E R 1 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 1 3 
Acute Coronary Occlusion During Bicuspid TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
OUTCOME
The family consented to an autopsy, which revealed a 
blockage of the RCA caused by severely calcified 
leaflet material of the original bicuspid valve 
(Figures 6A and 6B). A retrograde approach of the 
right coronary ostium clarified that selective angi-
ography and wire-crossing were impossible because a 
calcified mass of the original valve material caused an 
intermittent 
obstruction, which 
allowed 
only 
nonselective angiography of the RCA (Video 6).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
We encountered a case of RCA occlusion following 
TAVR in which revascularization proved to be 
extremely challenging. Furthermore, surgical inter-
vention was impossible owing to the limited avail-
ability of graft candidates owing to prior coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery, combined with an 
excessively high risk associated with open-heart 
surgery in the setting of cardiogenic shock during 
the later course of this case. Consequently, the
FIGURE 4 Circle Method Simulation of 26-mm Sapien 3 Valve Implantation
Simulation of a 26-mm Sapien 3 with circle method at the annulus level (A), Valsalva level (B), and right coronary artery (RCA) ostium level 
(C) and the simulation revealing the relationship between simulated valve and RCA ostium (D). Asterisk in C and D indicates RCA ostium. 
Blue circle and line express the stent flame of prosthetic valve, and red circle and line express the outer skirt of valve.
Taniguchi et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 0 , 2 0 2 5
Acute Coronary Occlusion During Bicuspid TAVR 
O C T O B E R 1 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 1 3
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
patient ultimately died. Autopsy findings revealed a 
spatial relationship between the calcified material on 
the aortic valve leaflet and the RCA ostium. It was 
suggested that intermittent mechanical obstruction 
caused by the calcified material had likely occurred, 
and it was presumed that refractory right ventricular
infarction contributed to the hemodynamic insta-
bility observed in this case.
Retrospectively, the bicuspid anatomy of the 
aortic valve resulted in an unforeseen displacement 
of the leaflet material with blockage of the RCA 
ostium. Furthermore, the blockage by the material 
and anomaly of the Valsalva sinus made the series of 
procedures for recanalization much more chal-
lenging. On the other hand, an imbalance of calcium 
volume might have been one of the significant signs 
informing us of the risk of critical complications such 
as coronary obstruction. With TAVR being more 
commonly performed in patients with bicuspid aortic 
valve anatomy, 1 this particular case should alert us to 
respect the complex anatomical structure of bicuspid 
aortic valves, where unforeseeable consequences 
may arise out of highly standardized and perceivably 
safe procedures.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Yousuke
Taniguchi, Department of Cardiology and Cardio-
vascular Diseases, German Heart Center Munich, 
Technical University Munich University Hospital, 
Lazarettstrasse 36, 80636 Munich, Germany. E-mail: 
taniguchi@dhm.mhn.de.
FIGURE 5 Coronary Angiography Following Sapien 3 Valve 
Implantation
Coronary angiography just after ST-segment elevation on 
electrocardiogram revealed total occlusion in right coronary 
artery (RCA) ostium. Asterisk indicates RCA ostium.
FIGURE 6 Autopsy Findings of the Aortic Root
(A) Preparation of the Edwards Sapien 3 valve prosthesis after autopsy with the roots of the left main (LM) and right coronary artery (RCA) 
showing the calcified tissue obstructing the right coronary ostium. (B) Magnification of the obstructed right coronary ostium. Asterisk 
indicates calcified tissue in (A) and (B).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 
Taniguchi et al
O C T O B E R 1 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 1 3 
Acute Coronary Occlusion During Bicuspid TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
R E F E R E N C E
1. Windecker S, Tomii D. Transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement in patients with bicuspid aortic 
stenosis: cumulative evidence and remaining un-
certainties. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2024;17:1676– 
1679.
KEY WORDS acute coronary syndrome, 
aortic valve, bicuspid aortic valve, 
complication, coronary angiography, valve 
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Taniguchi et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 0 , 2 0 2 5
Acute Coronary Occlusion During Bicuspid TAVR 
O C T O B E R 1 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 1 3
6
