
=== PAGE 1 ===
MULTIVALVULAR DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Surgical Reintervention for Complex, 
Multivalvular Rheumatic Heart Disease
Kathleen R. Khan, MD, a Christopher R. Burke, MD, b Jill M. Steiner, MD, MS a
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Multivalve intervention carries elevated risk, particularly after prior valve surgeries.
CASE SUMMARY A 52-year-old woman with rheumatic heart disease presented with progressive dyspnea. Multimo-
dality imaging revealed severe bioprosthetic aortic valve regurgitation, severe bioprosthetic mitral valve stenosis, and 
severe tricuspid valve regurgitation. Although she was at increased surgical risk, the small size of her aortic valve 
prosthesis limited transcatheter options. She elected to undergo cardiac surgery, which included bioprosthetic Bentall 
and Commando procedures as well as tricuspid valve repair. Postoperative course was complicated by right ventricular 
dysfunction with prolonged hospitalization; however, she recovered and was discharged home.
DISCUSSION This case demonstrates the challenges of multivalve intervention, despite comprehensive preparation 
including shared decision making and heart valve team planning.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Multidisciplinary planning for reintervention in multivalve disease can be complex without a 
single best solution. Shared decision making can help patients understand risks and make decisions aligned with their 
values. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:104356) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 52-year-old woman presented to the cardiology 
clinic for follow-up, noting fatigue and worse
exertional tolerance with housework. She had a his-
tory of rheumatic heart disease affecting the aortic 
and mitral valves. At age 21, she underwent surgical 
bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement (AVR) for se-
vere stenosis. At age 38, in the setting of severe bio-
prosthetic aortic valve and mitral valve regurgitation, 
she underwent repeat AVR with a 21-mm Freestyle 
(Medtronic) aortic root bioprosthesis and mitral valve 
replacement with a 29-mm Mosaic (Medtronic) bio-
prosthesis. Bioprosthetic valves were chosen per 
patient preference during her childbearing years.
On examination, vital signs were within normal 
limits, and she was well appearing. Cardiac exami-
nation was notable for a systolic murmur best heard
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Multidisciplinary planning for reinterven-
tion in multivalve disease can be compli-
cated without a single correct answer.
• Shared decision making can help patients 
understand the risks and benefits of poten-
tial treatments and make decisions aligned 
with their values.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104356
From the a Division of Cardiology, Department of Surgery, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, 
USA; and the b Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received April 3, 2025; revised manuscript received May 7, 2025, accepted May 9, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
at the lower left sternal border. Lungs were 
clear, abdomen was benign, and she had no 
peripheral edema. 
Transthoracic 
echocardiography 
(TTE) 
revealed normal biventricular function and 
elevated gradients across both bioprosthetic 
valves. Mitral stenosis was worse with mean 
gradient of 13 mm Hg at heart rate 80 beats/ 
min from 8 mm Hg prior. Aortic stenosis was 
mild with peak antegrade velocity 2.6 m/s 
compared with 1.6 m/s prior. No aortic 
regurgitation (AR) was visible. Estimated pulmonary 
artery systolic pressure was elevated at 39 to 
44 mm Hg. The Freestyle prosthesis was heavily 
calcified.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
Additional history included atrial flutter ablation, 
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation diagnosed after her 
most recent surgery (on apixaban), dual-chamber 
pacemaker for sinus node dysfunction, hyperlipid-
emia, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus compli-
cated by stage III chronic kidney disease.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Differential diagnoses for her symptoms included 
prosthetic valve degeneration and valve thrombosis.
Endocarditis was considered; however, she denied 
any infectious symptoms. Ischemic disease was 
thought less likely given a recent normal stress test.
INVESTIGATIONS
Laboratory evaluation was notable for mildly 
elevated B-type natriuretic peptide of 174 pg/mL 
(reference range <101 pg/mL). Creatinine was 
1.62 mg/dL (reference range 0.38-1.02 mg/dL), similar 
to prior values. Blood cultures were negative. Pace-
maker interrogation showed no tachyarrhythmias. 
Apixaban was switched empirically to warfarin, and a 
cardiac computed tomography scan was obtained to 
rule out valve thrombosis, which showed mitral 
calcification most consistent with calcific degenera-
tion (Figures 1A and 1B, Video 1).
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed 
thickened and restricted bioprosthetic mitral valve 
leaflets with a diastolic mean gradient of 6 mm Hg at 
heart rate 50 beats/min and moderate regurgitation 
(Figure 1C, Video 2). Severe AR was noted with a flail 
anterior cusp, not seen on prior studies (Figures 1E 
and 1F, Videos 3 and 4). Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) 
was severe. She had normal left and right ventricular 
size and systolic function.
Coronary 
angiography 
revealed 
mild 
non-
obstructive disease. Right heart catheterization was
VISUAL SUMMARY Timeline of Case Progression
AVR = aortic valve replacement; MVR = mitral valve replacement; RV = right ventricular.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AVR = aortic valve
replacement
RV = right ventricular
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiogram
TR = tricuspid regurgitation
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiogram
Khan et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5
Complex Reintervention for Rheumatic Heart Disease 
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 5 6
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 1 Multimodality Imaging Evaluation
Cardiac computed tomography showed extensive calcification of the Freestyle aortic root and aortic valve bioprosthesis (A) and bioprosthetic 
mitral valve (B), without evidence of valve thrombosis. Transesophageal echocardiography showed bioprosthetic mitral valve leaflet 
thickening with significantly decreased excursion (C) and mild to moderate regurgitation. Before surgery, transthoracic echocardiography 
showed severe bioprosthetic mitral valve stenosis with diastolic mean gradient of 21 mm Hg (D). Transesophageal echocardiography also 
revealed severe bioprosthetic aortic valve regurgitation secondary to a flail anterior cusp (E, F).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5 
Khan et al
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 5 6 
Complex Reintervention for Rheumatic Heart Disease
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
notable for elevated right-
and left-sided filling 
pressures, elevated mean pulmonary artery pressure 
of 40 mm Hg, pulmonary vascular resistance of 
3.25 Woods units, and transpulmonary gradient 
of 9 mm Hg, indicating postcapillary pulmonary 
hypertension. Cardiac index was reduced at
1.8 L/min/m 2 .
Repeat TTE for worsening symptoms showed 
moderate left ventricular dilation with an end-
diastolic volume index of 86 mL/m 2 and normal 
systolic function with ejection fraction 56%. Right 
ventricular (RV) systolic function was mildly reduced 
with tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 
10 mm and RV tissue Doppler velocity of 9.4 cm/s. 
Mitral valve stenosis was worse with mean gradient 
21 mm Hg at 76 beats/min (Figure 1D). Bioprosthetic 
AR and TR remained severe. Pulmonary artery sys-
tolic pressure was severely elevated, estimated at 87 
to 92 mm Hg.
MANAGEMENT
The patient continued to experience progressive 
heart failure symptoms and renal dysfunction 
despite up-titration in diuretics. She was able to walk 
only a few steps and was unable to lie flat.
The case was discussed at a multidisciplinary 
conference. There was concern that she would be 
high risk for surgical intervention given her prior 
surgeries, comorbidities, and invasive hemody-
namics. Transcatheter intervention was also pro-
posed; however, this was thought to be suboptimal as 
it would require multiple staged procedures, and 
valve-in-valve transcatheter AVR would leave 
limited options for future reintervention given the 
small size of her bioprosthesis. Options were dis-
cussed with the patient, including the risk of wors-
ening renal function and dialysis. Following the 
discussion, she elected surgical intervention.
The patient was admitted for cardiac surgery, 
which included bioprosthetic AVR and root replace-
ment (Bentall procedure) with a 23-mm Konect 
Resilia valved conduit (Edwards Lifesciences), mitral 
valve replacement with a 29-mm Epic bioprosthetic 
valve with reconstruction of the aortomitral fibrous 
body (Commando procedure), tricuspid valve repair, 
removal of her intravenous pacemaker leads, and 
placement of epicardial pacing wires. The operative 
course was complicated by severe calcification of the 
Freestyle graft and small coronary buttons, aortic 
root bleeding, and severe RV dysfunction refractory 
to inotropic support. TEE following cardiopulmonary 
bypass wean showed that RV fractional area change 
was severely reduced at 16%. She was placed on
venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
support and transported to the cardiac catheteriza-
tion laboratory where ostial right coronary artery 
stenosis was treated with a 3.5 × 28 mm drug-eluting 
stent.
She had a prolonged intensive care course, with 
central 
venoarterial 
extracorporeal 
membrane 
oxygenation transitioned to right ventricular assist 
device. Although she was able to be weaned from 
mechanical circulatory support, she remained on 
inotropic support until postoperative day 24. Addi-
tional complications included ventilator-associated 
pneumonia, acute renal injury requiring dialysis, 
epicardial pacemaker lead dysfunction requiring 
leadless device placement, and surgical debridement 
of a sacral wound.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
After a 1.5-month hospitalization, the patient was 
discharged home with physical/occupational ther-
apy. At the time of discharge, renal function had 
improved to baseline. She also had follow-up sched-
uled with electrophysiology, nephrology, endocri-
nology, and wound care subspecialists.
At her 1-month posthospitalization appointment, 
she was recovering well. She had normal biven-
tricular and prosthetic valve function. At 6 months, 
she was walking for 30 minutes a day, although still 
needing daily diuretics.
DISCUSSION
This was a challenging case of a patient with rheu-
matic heart disease and 2 prior cardiac surgeries who 
developed rapid degeneration of bioprosthetic aortic 
and mitral valves as well as severe TR. Her presen-
tation highlights how it can be difficult to differen-
tiate the primary driver of symptoms in patients with 
multiple valvular abnormalities.
As stated in the most recent American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Guidelines, a 
comprehensive approach to imaging and hemody-
namic evaluation is required in mixed valve disease, 
as the typical methods for estimating severity may be 
limited. 1 For example, the severity of this patient’s 
aortic valve pathology could have been under-
estimated owing to reduced left ventricular filling 
from mitral stenosis. Additionally, detection of bio-
prosthetic mitral regurgitation is particularly difficult 
on TTE due to acoustic shadowing, so TEE is often 
needed for diagnosis. 2
A multidisciplinary heart valve team meeting is 
also emphasized in the guidelines as it is key for 
discussing advantages and risks of each approach. 1,3
Khan et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5
Complex Reintervention for Rheumatic Heart Disease 
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 5 6
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
In this case, transcatheter options would have 
required multiple staged procedures, and there was 
concern about feasibility with her small aortic bio-
prosthesis as well as low coronary implants, risking 
coronary obstruction and paucity of options for 
future interventions. Transcatheter tricuspid valve 
intervention would also be challenging with the 
presence of a right ventricular pacemaker lead. 
Although she had increased risk with a triple-valve 
surgery and third sternotomy, surgery was thought 
to offer the most comprehensive solution for her 
complex 
anatomy. 
Together, 
this 
discussion 
informed shared decision making with the patient, 
and she decided to proceed with surgery.
This case also highlights important considerations 
in choice of mechanical or bioprosthetic valve 
replacement. At the time of prior surgeries, she 
preferred to avoid the teratogenicity and bleeding 
risks of warfarin during childbearing years, notably at 
the cost of eventual bioprosthetic valve degenera-
tion. Now in her sixth decade, either mechanical or 
bioprosthetic valves would be reasonable. 1 A me-
chanical mitral valve requires uninterrupted anti-
coagulation and a higher international normalized 
ratio goal of 2.5 to 3.5, which is nontrivial following a 
higher-risk cardiac surgery and for a patient who may 
be at increased fall risk. In contrast, with a bio-
prosthetic mitral valve, she would have lower 
bleeding risk on a direct oral anticoagulant. 4,5 The 
size of aortic and mitral bioprosthetic valves that 
were chosen would be amenable to valve-in-valve 
transcatheter intervention should she require it in 
the future.
The patient’s prolonged intensive care course was 
driven by RV failure postoperatively requiring 
inotropic and mechanical circulatory support. The
etiology of impaired RV function was likely multi-
factorial including coronary ischemia, which was 
quickly recognized and treated with percutaneous 
coronary intervention. Repairing severe TR also 
carries the risk of acutely loading the right ventricle 
by removing its “pop-off valve,” particularly in the 
context of elevated pulmonary pressures. Prompt 
initiation of circulatory support and addressing 
drivers of RV failure minimized end-organ injury and 
ultimately helped the patient recover.
CONCLUSIONS
Whereas this case demonstrates the feasibility of a 
complex multivalve operation performed by an 
experienced surgical team at a comprehensive valve 
center, it is also an example of the high morbidity that 
can follow. Multimodality imaging and hemodynamic 
data are often necessary to fully characterize valvular 
lesions before considering intervention. A patient-
centered approach and multidisciplinary valve team 
involvement are vitally important for weighing 
treatment risks and developing a thorough care plan. 
Finally, having expertise to recognize and treat 
complications as well as involving specialty consul-
tation are crucial to achieving successful outcomes in 
such complex cases.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Jill M.
Steiner, Division of Cardiology, 1959 NE Pacific 
Street, HSB C502, Box 356422, Seattle, Washington 
98195, USA. E-mail: jills8@uw.edu.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Otto C, Nishimura R, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association joint committee on clinical practice 
guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77(4):e25– 
e197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.11.018
2. Zoghbi WA, Jone PN, Chamsi-Pasha MA, 
et al. Guidelines for the evaluation of pros-
thetic valve function with cardiovascular im-
aging: a report from the American Society of 
Echocardiography developed in collaboration 
with the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic 
Resonance and the Society of Cardiovascular 
Computed Tomography. J Am Soc Echocardi-
ography. 2024;37(1):2–63. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/J.ECHO.2023.10.004
3. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021 ESC/ 
EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular 
heart disease: developed by the Task Force for the 
management of valvular heart disease of the Eu-
ropean Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the Euro-
pean Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery 
(EACTS). Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2022;75(6):524. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.REC.2022.05.006
4. Fath AR, Aglan A, Altaee O, et al. Direct oral 
anticoagulants for rheumatic heart disease-
associated atrial fibrillation post-bioprosthetic 
mitral valve replacement. JACC Clin Electro-
physiol. 2024;10(12):2701–2710. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jacep.2024.08.005
5. Joglar J, Chung M, Armbruster A, et al. 2023 
ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS guideline for the diagnosis
and management of atrial fibrillation: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology/Amer-
ican Heart Association joint committee on 
clinical practice guidelines. JACC. 2024;83(1): 
109–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2023. 
08.017
KEY WORDS aortic valve, mitral valve, 
rheumatic heart disease, tricuspid valve, 
valve replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 3 , 2 0 2 5 
Khan et al
O C T O B E R 2 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 3 5 6 
Complex Reintervention for Rheumatic Heart Disease
5
