
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Bailout Strategies for Balloon 
Entrapment During TAVR in 
Type 0 Bicuspid Aortic Valve
Yanren Peng, MD, Yongqing Lin, MS, Haifeng Zhang, MD, Ruqiong Nie, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Balloon entrapment during transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a rare but serious 
complication, especially in patients with severe valve calcification.
CASE SUMMARY A 78-year-old woman with symptomatic severe aortic stenosis (peak velocity 7.23 m/s, preserved 
left ventricular ejection fraction 70%) underwent TAVR. After valve deployment, the balloon became entrapped within 
the prosthesis. Controlled postdilation was performed to disrupt the valve frame mesh, successfully releasing the 
balloon. The patient recovered well; at nearly 3 years of follow-up, she remains asymptomatic without rehospitalization 
for heart failure or neurologic events.
DISCUSSION This case highlights the role of controlled postdilation as a safe and effective bailout strategy for balloon 
entrapment during TAVR. Reviewing the literature, balloon entrapment is rare but potentially life-threatening, and 
prompt recognition with appropriate technical solutions is critical for favorable outcomes.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Balloon entrapment during TAVR is rare but can be effectively managed with controlled 
postdilation, particularly in patients with severe calcification. Ensuring correct guidewire position in the left ventricle, 
confirmed by multiple fluoroscopic views, helps prevent balloon entrapment by avoiding passage through the 
stent mesh. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105893) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 78-year-old woman with symptomatic severe aortic 
stenosis was referred to our center because of wors­
ening dyspnea at rest (NYHA functional class IV). On 
admission, echocardiography revealed severe aortic 
stenosis with a peak velocity of 7.23 m/s and a mean 
gradient of 126 mm Hg, mild aortic regurgitation, and 
preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (70%). 
The interventricular septum measured 14 mm, and 
the posterior wall thickness was 13 mm. 
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a history of paroxysmal atrial fibril­
lation, hypertension, prior gastrointestinal bleeding, 
postoperative colorectal cancer, and mild anemia. 
These comorbidities complicated her management, 
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105893
From the Department of Cardiology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received April 22, 2025; revised manuscript received September 8, 2025, accepted September 25, 2025.
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S
V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  4 0 ,  2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5  T H E  A U T H O R S .  P U B L I S H E D  B Y  E L S E V I E R  O N  B E H A L F  O F  T H E  A M E R I C A N  
C O L L E G E  O F  C A R D I O L O G Y  F O U N D A T I O N .  T H I S  I S  A N  O P E N  A C C E S S  A R T I C L E  U N D E R  
T H E  C C  B Y - N C - N D  L I C E N S E  ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
with a Society of Thoracic Surgeons score for 
operative 
mortality 
calculated 
at 
5.8%. 
Following a heart team discussion, trans­
catheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) 
was recommended because of the patient’s 
advanced age and preference.
Cardiac computed tomography revealed a 
type 0 bicuspid aortic valve with significant calcifi­
cation (calcium score 1,365), a horizontal aortic root 
(aortic angulation 60◦), and a relatively enlarged 
ascending aorta (diameter 37.7 mm) compared with 
the aortic annulus. The aortic annulus perimeter 
measured 73.2 mm (derived diameter 23.3 mm), and 
peripheral arteries were deemed suitable for TAVR.
TREATMENT
TAVR was successfully performed via transfemoral 
access using a 20-F sheath. Difficulty was encoun­
tered at the initial valve crossing because of the small 
size of the left ventricular cavity and high myocardial 
contractility, which caused guidewire instability. 
After 2 failed attempts, the procedure was completed 
on the third attempt.
Pre-dilation with an 18-mm balloon (NuMED, Inc) 
revealed waist formation, indicating the need for a 
VenusA-Valve 
23-mm 
valve 
(Venus 
MedTech). 
Following valve deployment, the frame became 
compressed, and the guidewire shifted into the 
ascending aorta owing to strong myocardial con­
tractions. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
revealed a moderate paravalvular leak, prompting 
the use of a 20-mm balloon (NuMED, Inc) for post­
dilation (Figure 1).
However, retrieval of the second balloon proved 
difficult due to potential entrapment. While applying 
sustained negative pressure, multiple attempts were 
made to adjust the guidewire and imaging angles 
under fluoroscopic guidance. 
These maneuvers 
gradually shifted the balloon marker from the skirt of 
the stent frame to the waist of the valve frame. 
Despite this, further movement was restricted, 
complicating retrieval.
Ultimately, controlled postdilation was performed 
to intentionally rupture the stent frame (Figure 2). 
Multiple inflations at controlled pressure allowed for 
successful balloon release and retrieval. Angiography 
confirmed valve frame disruption, and echocardiog­
raphy 
and 
contrast 
imaging 
showed 
mild-to- 
moderate residual paravalvular leak (Video 1).
Postprocedure, TEE revealed pericardial effusion, 
suspected to be caused by right ventricular perfora­
tion from the pacing lead during chest compressions. 
Emergency 
pericardiocentesis 
was 
performed, 
draining hemorrhagic fluid. The patient was managed 
with autotransfusion, fresh frozen plasma (leuko­
cyte-depleted), and protamine sulfate to stabilize her 
coagulation status.
Her blood pressure remained stable, and post­
operative pericardial drainage was minimal (134 mL 
on day 0), with no further drainage on days 1 and 2, 
leading to the removal of the drain. The patient was 
discharged on postoperative day 7 in improved clin­
ical condition (NYHA functional class II).
DISCUSSION
Balloon entrapment during TAVR is a rare but serious 
complication, particularly when the balloon becomes 
lodged in the mesh of the valve frame, preventing 
retrieval and complicating the procedure. This re­
quires careful management to avoid damage to the 
valve or surrounding structures.
In our case, we employed a controlled postdilation 
strategy to resolve the balloon entrapment. The use 
of multiple fluoroscopic views was crucial to monitor 
balloon movement during the retrieval process. 
Initially, the guidewire position was adjusted to 
minimize tension and align both the balloon and the 
guidewire. Negative pressure was then applied to the 
balloon during retraction, with controlled pressure 
applied each time the balloon moved a certain dis­
tance. As the balloon’s distal marker reached the 
waist of the valve frame and the proximal marker 
passed the top, further retraction was not possible. 
Subsequent angiography showed that the balloon 
was trapped in the mesh at the top of the frame. After 
consulting with Venus engineers, we concluded that 
controlled postdilation had sufficiently disrupted the 
mesh, enabling the balloon to be released. Ulti­
mately, the balloon was successfully retrieved.
Balloon entrapment during the retrieval process 
can sometimes cause valve displacement.1 In our 
case, the severe calcification of the leaflet helped to 
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Balloon entrapment during TAVR is a rare 
but serious complication that can be effec­
tively managed with controlled postdilation, 
particularly in patients with severe 
calcification.
• Ensuring the guidewire is correctly placed in 
the left ventricle or verifying its position 
with multiple fluoroscopic views when re- 
entering can effectively prevent potential 
balloon entrapment by ensuring the guide­
wire passes through the valve frame, not the 
mesh.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S  
A N D  A C R O N Y M S
TAVR = transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal 
echocardiography
Peng et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  4 0 ,  2 0 2 5  
Balloon Entrapment During TAVR 
D E C E M B E R  1 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 9 3
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
secure the valve frame, preventing displacement 
despite entrapment of the balloon being trapped. 
This highlights the role of severe calcification in 
stabilizing the valve frame, which played a crucial 
part in facilitating balloon retrieval without valve 
movement.
Piayda et al2 described a similar case involving a 
type 0 bicuspid aortic valve with severe calcification 
(calcium score 741.9 mm3). In their case, the Cor­
eValve Evolut PRO 26-mm value was used, and 
although balloon entrapment occurred, the valve 
frame remained intact. Instead, the balloon deflated 
into 2 pieces during postdilation, which facilitated its 
retrieval without causing damage to the valve frame. 
Although their approach was effective owing to the 
valve’s design, we employed controlled postdilation 
to disrupt the frame rather than relying solely on 
balloon deflation. This suggests that in patients with 
severe calcification, postdilation to disrupt the frame 
may be a preferable strategy for releasing an 
entrapped balloon, particularly when the valve is 
difficult to manipulate.
FIGURE 1
Wire Crossing of the Stent Mesh 
(A) Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (before postdilation). (B) Schematic of the guidewire passing through the stent mesh (yellow area represents intact mesh). 
(C) Angiographic view of the guidewire and implanted valve.
FIGURE 2
Postdilation of the Stent Mesh 
(A) The balloon appears dumbbell-shaped under pressure within the stent mesh. (B) Schematic of balloon expansion inside the stent mesh (green indicates the 
balloon, red indicates the fractured mesh. (C) Angiographic view of the ruptured stent frame (red arrow denotes the ruptured area).
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  4 0 ,  2 0 2 5  
Peng et al 
D E C E M B E R  1 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 9 3  
Balloon Entrapment During TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
In contrast, other methods have been reported for 
balloon entrapment resolution. Vella et al3 used the 
Amplatzer 12-F delivery system to encapsulate the 
balloon and delivery system together, allowing for 
removal without causing valve displacement. This 
technique was successful owing to the larger mesh in 
the Acurate Neo2 valve. However, this approach is 
not applicable to VenusA valves, which have fewer 
and smaller mesh structures, making it unsuitable for 
our case. Similarly, Franzese et al4 proposed an 
innovative approach using the snare technique to 
capture the balloon through the atrial septum, 
extracting the balloon from the left heart to the 
inferior vena cava. Although effective, this method 
did not seem feasible in our case because of the pa­
tient’s small left ventricle and hypertrophied papil­
lary muscles, which would have made the procedure 
technically more challenging.
Our case offers several important insights. For 
patients with small ventricles and high myocardial 
contractility, it is essential to stabilize the guidewire, 
as it plays a critical role in ensuring procedural suc­
cess. Additionally, for patients with type 0 bicuspid 
aortic valves or patients with aortic anatomy in 
which there is sufficient space between the frame and 
the ascending aorta, it is crucial to verify that the 
guidewire passes through the frame rather than the 
mesh during postdilation. This can be achieved by 
using multiple fluoroscopic projections and, when 
necessary, adjunctive techniques such as pigtail 
catheter confirmation or TEE to ensure central wire 
crossing. In addition, in patients with severe valve 
calcification, using negative pressure to move the 
balloon and performing controlled postdilation to 
disrupt the frame can effectively release an entrap­
ped balloon, provided that the relative fragility of 
both 
the 
balloon and 
the frame 
is 
carefully 
considered.
Finally, although intentional disruption of the 
stent frame enabled balloon retrieval in this case, 
such a maneuver inevitably raises concerns regarding 
valve integrity and long-term safety. A disrupted 
frame may generate free struts that could injure the 
aortic wall, predispose to dissection, or, if fractured, 
lead to vascular trauma, embolization, or stroke. 
In our patient, the disruption occurred at the 
uppermost crown of the frame, which normally ap­
poses 
the 
aortic 
wall; 
however, 
because 
the 
ascending aorta was dilated, the fractured mesh did 
not directly contact the vessel wall, thereby miti­
gating these risks. During follow-up of nearly 3 years, 
valve function remained stable with only mild para­
valvular leak. These findings suggest that controlled 
frame disruption may be feasible in highly selected 
patients, but the potential complications warrant 
cautious application and further study.
FOLLOW-UP
The patient has been regularly followed up since the 
TAVR procedure. At the 30-month follow-up, echo­
cardiography demonstrated an aortic valve peak flow 
velocity of 2.56 m/s, with a reduction in the thickness 
of the interventricular septum and posterior wall to 
12 mm and 11 mm, respectively. The left ventricular 
ejection fraction remained stable at 68%, with a mild 
paravalvular leak. By the 3-year follow-up, the pa­
tient remained free of rehospitalization for heart 
failure or neurological events, including stroke.
CONCLUSIONS
Balloon entrapment during TAVR is a rare but serious 
complication. In this case, it was effectively managed 
using sustained negative pressure during balloon 
retraction, 
multiple 
fluoroscopic 
views, 
and 
controlled postdilation. The patient’s severe leaflet 
calcification helped stabilize the valve frame, pre­
venting 
displacement, 
and 
regular 
follow-up 
confirmed that the approach was feasible, with no 
rehospitalizations or neurologic events.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
This study was supported by the Guangzhou Municipal Science and 
Technology Bureau (Grant No. 202206080014) and the 2024 Yat-sen 
Postdoctoral Startup Program (Grant No. 9390025007). The authors 
have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the con­
tents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Ruqiong Nie, 
Department of Cardiology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial 
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 107 Yanjiang West 
Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510120, China. E-mail: 
289243941@qq.com.
Peng et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  4 0 ,  2 0 2 5  
Balloon Entrapment During TAVR 
D E C E M B E R  1 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 9 3
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Cubero-Gallego H, Millan X, Asmarats L, Li C-H, 
Vaquerizo B, Arzamendi D. Transcatheter aortic 
valve prosthesis displacement after postdilation 
balloon entrapment. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2022;15:e175–e177.
2. Piayda K, Hellhammer K, Veulemans V, 
Zeus T. Valvuloplasty balloon entrapment in a 
self-expanding aortic valve stent frame after 
inadvertent wire passage through the outflow 
struts. Cathet Cardio Intervent. 2019;93:174– 
177.
3. Vella C, Romano V, Ancona MB, et al. 
Incorrect recrossing of transcatheter aortic 
valve. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2022;15:e173– 
e174.
4. Franzese I, Francica A, Pesarini G, et al. Intra­
ventricular entrapment of a Sapien-3 balloon in 
transapical TAVR: a near missed catastrophe. 
J Card Surg. 2020;35:2093–2096.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, bicuspid aortic 
valve, treatment, valve replacement
APPENDIX For a supplemental video, 
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  4 0 ,  2 0 2 5  
Peng et al 
D E C E M B E R  1 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 9 3  
Balloon Entrapment During TAVR
5
