
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Intraprocedural Cardiac Arrest
and Multivessel Spasm During 
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
Yaseen Maqsood Hakim, BS, a Benjamin Stripe, MD b
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Cardiac arrest during transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is an infrequent complication 
often attributed to coronary obstruction. Causes include sinus sequestration, ostial obstruction by native leaflets or 
transcatheter valve skirt, and calcium embolization.
CASE SUMMARY An elderly patient with severe aortic stenosis sustained an intraprocedural cardiac arrest due to left 
main coronary artery spasm with concomitant iliofemoral spasm during TAVR. He was successfully treated with a 
drug-eluting stent and underwent TAVR 2 days later.
DISCUSSION This case highlights an unusual presentation of diffuse vasospasm involving the left main coronary artery 
and iliofemoral vessels in the absence of typical risk factors. Prompt recognition of ischemia on cardiac monitoring and 
percutaneous coronary intervention were essential for survival.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Multivessel spasm including in the left main coronary artery can precipitate cardiac arrest 
during TAVR, even in the absence of traditional risk factors. Recognition and intervention with intracoronary 
vasodilators and percutaneous coronary intervention are critical for managing vasospasm-related arrest.
(JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105840) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 65-year-old male with a history of severe aortic 
stenosis presented with worsening fatigue, dyspnea 
on exertion, and presyncopal episodes. Physical 
exam revealed a late peaking III/VI systolic ejection 
murmur with a diminished A2 sound. The patient 
declined surgical aortic valve replacement due to 
diminished social support and history of poor wound 
healing. During diagnostic catheterization for
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) 
workup, the patient was found to have severe mul-
tivessel coronary artery disease. A plan was made for 
the patient to undergo TAVR in approximately 
2 months after revascularization. The patient had 
successful revascularization of a chronic total occlu-
sion in the left circumflex and underwent investment 
chronic total occlusion percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) to the right coronary artery with a 
plan to return in the future for definitive stent
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105840
From the a School of Medicine, University of California-Davis, Sacramento, California, USA; and the b Division of Cardiology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California-Davis, Sacramento, California, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received August 29, 2025; revised manuscript received September 9, 2025, accepted September 16, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 0 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
implantation. Subsequently, he experienced 
a gastrointestinal bleed raising concern for 
possible Heyde syndrome.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient has a past medical history of 
severe coronary artery disease, hyperlipid-
emia, and severe aortic stenosis. The patient 
is a former smoker with an unknown pack-year 
history.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Differential diagnosis for cardiac arrest included 
acute plaque rupture and coronary vasospasm.
INVESTIGATIONS
Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography revea-
led an aortic valve area of 0.7 cm 2 , mean pressure 
gradient of 40 mm Hg, and peak velocity of 
4.2 m/s, reaffirming a diagnosis of severe aortic 
stenosis. 
Computed 
tomography 
angiography 
demonstrated a left main coronary artery height of 
11.9 mm (Figure 1A) and right coronary artery height 
of 16.2 mm (Figure 1B). Intravascular ultrasound 
from prior cardiac catheterization was used for 
vessel sizing (Figure 2).
MANAGEMENT
The right common femoral artery was cannulated 
with a 6-F sidearm sheath. The left common 
femoral artery and left common femoral vein were 
cannulated with 7-F and 6-F Sidearm sheaths, 
respectively. The right femoral pressure waveform 
was dampened, and angiography of the right ilio-
femoral system suggested spasm (Figure 3). Left 
iliofemoral angiography appeared normal in size; 
however, invasive pressures demonstrated hypo-
tension, and ST segment depressions were observed 
in multiple leads. The patient reported feeling 
diffusely warm and nauseous and subsequently 
became unresponsive. He went into pulseless elec-
trical activity arrest, prompting initiation of
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Multivessel spasm including the left main 
coronary artery can precipitate cardiac 
arrest during transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement, even in the absence of 
traditional risk factors.
• Recognition and intervention with intra-
coronary vasodilators and percutaneous
coronary intervention are critical for man-
aging vasospasm-related arrest.
FIGURE 1 Preoperative Computed Tomography
(A) Preoperative computed tomography demonstrating height of left main coronary artery. (B) Computed tomography of the right coronary 
artery. LM = left main coronary artery; RCA = right coronary artery.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
ECMO = extracorporeal
membranous oxygenation
PCI = percutaneous coronary
intervention
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Hakim and Stripe 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 0 , 2 0 2 5
Intraprocedural Arrest With Multivessel Spasm During TAVR 
D E C E M B E R 1 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 4 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
advanced cardiac life support and extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
Anesthesia records showed no administration of 
vasopressors prior to cardiac arrest. The patient went 
into ventricular tachycardia several times, requiring 
multiple shocks, 9 rounds of epinephrine, sodium 
bicarbonate, and calcium. Return of spontaneous 
circulation was achieved after 17 minutes of resusci-
tation. Following this, diagnostic angiography 
revealed severe left main coronary artery spasm with 
near occlusion (Figure 4A), which improved with 
intracoronary nitroglycerin (Figure 4B). A decision was 
made to proceed with PCI due to the unclear cause of 
his spasm and concern for a fatal event. Balloon an-
gioplasty of the ostial left main coronary artery was 
performed; however, the balloon could not be deliv-
ered into the proximal left anterior descending artery, 
thus was removed. Another wire was advanced into 
the left circumflex, and balloon angioplasty was 
successfully performed. A 3.5 × 15-mm XIENCE 
Skypoint drug-eluting stent (Abbott Cardiovascular) 
was implanted across the left main coronary artery 
into the proximal left anterior descending artery and 
was postdilated with a 4.0 × 15 noncompliant balloon. 
Coronary angiography showed TIMI flow grade 2 
with excellent stent expansion and apposition 
(Figure 4C).
The patient was taken to the cardiothoracic 
intensive care unit on ventilator and ECMO support. 
Rescue balloon aortic valvuloplasty was not 
performed since ECMO obviated the need for a 
reduction of the gradient across the aortic valve. 
Three days later, the patient underwent TAVR with a 
23-mm Edwards Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia valve. The 
post-TAVR gradient was reduced to 1 mm Hg on 
ECMO support.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient’s ejection fraction improved from 25% 
after pulseless electrical activity arrest to 45%. 
Guideline-directed medical therapy was initiated 
with metoprolol, spironolactone, losartan, and 
empagliflozin. The patient developed a new complete 
heart block 1 day after TAVR, requiring a transvenous 
pacemaker and subsequent permanent pacemaker. 
He was discharged from the hospital, and at 1-month 
follow-up, he showed improvement in functional 
status, no neurologic deficits, and a recovered ejec-
tion fraction of 55%.
DISCUSSION
Coronary vasospasm as the cause of cardiac arrest has 
been described in previous cases. 1,2,3,4 Typical risk
factors include tobacco use, the use of alpha-
adrenergic agonists, initiation of single-lung venti-
lation, and Raynaud’s syndrome. 5,6 Prior cases of 
acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction 
complicated by femoral artery spasm have been
FIGURE 2 Preoperative Intravascular Ultrasound of the Left Main Coronary Artery 
for Stent Sizing
FIGURE 3 Vasospasm During Iliofemoral Angiography
(A) Right common femoral artery vasospasm. (B) Right common femoral artery without 
spasm.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 0 , 2 0 2 5 
Hakim and Stripe
D E C E M B E R 1 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 4 0 
Intraprocedural Arrest With Multivessel Spasm During TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
reported; however, this is the first reported case of 
multivessel 
coronary 
spasm 
with 
iliofemoral 
involvement prior to valve deployment during 
TAVR. 3 Intraprocedural arrest during TAVR is a rare 
complication of the procedure that customarily oc-
curs due to direct coronary obstruction by the 
transcatheter valve itself or embolized calcium. 7 The 
diffuse nature of spasm involving multiple vascular 
beds including the left main coronary artery, right 
external iliac, and common femoral arteries demon-
strates a unique presentation of vasospasm for which 
a cause currently remains unknown.
Previous 
investigations 
regarding 
catheter-
induced vasospasm suggest that spasm in the distal 
vasculature during catheterization is classically a 
focal process and is related to the catheter/vessel 
ratio. 8 Apart from a history of tobacco use, the 
patient did not have any significant risk factors that 
would have caused severe vasospasm. The sudden 
nature of this patient’s intraprocedural arrest during 
TAVR draws attention to the need for increased sur-
veillance for such an event when undergoing trans-
catheter interventions. Vigilant electrocardiographic 
monitoring allows the operator to quickly identify 
ischemic ST-segment changes that suggest vaso-
spasm is occurring and to initiate the appropriate 
interventions. Although this patient lacked signifi-
cant risk factors, careful consideration of prior his-
tory that increases risk of spasm is crucial. Using the 
smallest feasible catheter may also reduce the risk of 
spasm. This complication also illustrates the value of 
a collaborative heart team approach to ensure 
prompt access to advanced support measures, 
including ECMO.
In addition, meticulous preplanning played a 
critical role in swiftly addressing intraoperative 
complications. Prior echocardiography ruled out 
alternative causes of decompensation such as hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy and allowed rapid 
identification of coronary vasospasm as the culprit. 
As the patient had previously undergone intravas-
cular ultrasound evaluation of his coronary arteries, 
vessel sizing was known prior to his TAVR and 
facilitated rapid stent placement after intracoronary 
nitroglycerin failed to completely resolve the 
vasospasm.
CONCLUSIONS
This case highlights a potentially fatal complication 
of TAVR due to multivessel spasm involving the 
left main coronary artery and iliofemoral vessels. 
While cardiac arrest during TAVR is often due to 
mechanical obstruction by the valve leaflets or 
skirt, this complication emphasizes the need to 
consider vasospasm as a potential precipitant. 
Rapid identification of vasospasm allows for prompt 
intervention with intracoronary vasodilators and 
PCI if necessary.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Yaseen
Maqsood Hakim, University of California-Davis School 
of Medicine, 4610 X Street, Sacramento, California 
95817, USA. E-mail: ymhakim@health.ucdavis.edu.
FIGURE 4 Coronary Artery Vasospasm During TAVR
(A) Left main coronary artery angiogram before intracoronary nitroglycerin. (B) Mildly improved vasospasm after intracoronary nitroglycerin. 
(C) Left main coronary artery angiogram after stent placement with stent placement. NTG = nitroglycerin.
Hakim and Stripe 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 0 , 2 0 2 5
Intraprocedural Arrest With Multivessel Spasm During TAVR 
D E C E M B E R 1 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 4 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Kaneko H, Hoelschermann F, Tambor G, et al. 
Multivessel coronary artery spasm after trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2016;9(6):621–622.
2. Cai H, Chen S, Wang D. Sudden diffuse spasm 
of multiple coronary arteries: a case report. 
Medicine. 2024;103(2):e36889.
3. Chengzhi G, Huapeng Y, Daixu L, et al. Vaso-
spastic myocardial infarction complicated with 
bilateral femoral arteries vasospasm. Am J Emerg 
Med. 2018;36(8):1521.e3–1521.e6.
4. Anderson MM, Gooi J, Baghwat K, et al. Coro-
nary vasospasm as an unexpected cause of intra-
operative hemodynamic instability and cardiac 
arrest. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100(30):1086– 
1089.
5. Adams J, Denver M, Rae A. Coronary artery 
spasm leading to life threatening arrhythmias. 
Heart. 1998;80(1):89–90.
6. Xiang D, Kleber FX. Smoking and hyperlipid-
emia are important risk factors for coronary artery 
spasm. Chin Med J. 2003;116(4):510–513.
7. Umihiko K, Ryuji K, Hirosato D, et al. Obstruc-
tion of 2 coronary arteries from different causes 
immediately after transapical transcatheter aortic
valve replacement. Tex Heart Inst J. 2020;47(1): 
30–34.
8. Franken EA, Girod D, Sequeira FW, et al. 
Femoral artery spasm in children: catheter size is 
the principal cause. Am J Roentgenol. 1982;138 
(2):295–298.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, percutaneous 
coronary intervention, valve replacement, 
ventricular tachycardia
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 0 , 2 0 2 5 
Hakim and Stripe
D E C E M B E R 1 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 8 4 0 
Intraprocedural Arrest With Multivessel Spasm During TAVR
5
