
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Percutaneous Management of Left
Ventricular Perforation Causing Late
Cardiac Tamponade After Transcatheter
Aortic Valve Implantation
Krishnarpan Chatterjee, MD, DM, Pyotr Telyuk, MBCHB, Stuart W. Grant, PHD, Paul D. Williams, MD,
Douglas F. Muir, MBCHB, Seth Vijayan, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND We present a case of left ventricular perforation and delayed cardiac tamponade after transcatheter
aortic valve implantation (TAVI) managed percutaneously. This report describes a novel technique for management of
left ventricular perforation after TAVI.
CASE SUMMARY We performed elective transfemoral TAVI in a frail 85-year-old lady. Anatomical challenges included
tortuous and horizontal aorta and a small left ventricular cavity. A 23-mm Sapien valve was implanted. She developed
cardiac tamponade the next day needing emergency pericardiocentesis. Left ventricular angiogram showed perforation of
the lateral wall. SURGIFLO Hemostatic Matrix was injected into the pericardial space using Agilis steerable introducer
with a good outcome.
DISCUSSION Cardiac perforation and tamponade are serious and potentially fatal complications after TAVI. The out-
comes in these patients remain poor with high mortality rate even with emergent cardiac surgery. This report describes a
novel technique for management of left ventricular perforation after TAVI. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103193) Crown
Copyright © 2025 Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
T
ranscatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI)
is an established therapy for symptomatic se-
vere aortic stenosis.1,2 Left ventricular (LV)
perforation is a rare but serious complication that
may occur during TAVI and is associated with a very
high mortality rate.3 This risk is increased in those
with challenging aortic and LV anatomy. Here we pre-
sent an unusual case of delayed presentation of LV
perforation that was successfully managed without
the need for open surgical repair using Surgiﬂo
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Importance of recognizing high-risk anatom-
ical features during TAVI planning like small
and hyperdynamic left ventricle, left
ventricular outﬂow tract calcium, and
tortuous and horizontal aorta.
 Possible causes for cardiovascular collapse
after TAVI need to be identiﬁed and managed
promptly.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103193
From the Academic Cardiovascular Unit, James Cook University Hospital, Middlesbrough, United Kingdom.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received September 19, 2024; revised manuscript received November 1, 2024, accepted November 21, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 5 , 2 0 2 5
C R O W N C O P Y R I G H T ª 2 0 2 5 P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R T H E
C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
hemostatic matrix. Surgiﬂo is a hemostatic
matrix
comprising
gelatin
and
thrombin
used
to
control
bleeding
during
cardiac
surgery.4
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
The patient is an 85-year-old lady who has been un-
der surveillance in the cardiology clinic for moderate
aortic stenosis. She presented acutely with worsening
breathlessness and leg swelling for 3-4 months. There
were no symptoms of angina, palpitations, or syn-
cope. Clinical examination revealed bilateral pitting
pedal edema and a harsh ejection systolic murmur on
auscultation in the aortic area. A clinical diagnosis of
symptomatic
severe
aortic
stenosis
precipitating
heart failure was made. The patient was started on
diuretics with improvement in symptoms.
Past medical history included inferior ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction a decade ago, treated
with primary percutaneous intervention to right cor-
onary artery. There was moderate residual left ante-
rior descending artery disease managed with medical
therapy. She also had hypertension, severe kypho-
scoliosis, and limited mobility due to a combination
of frailty and kypho-scoliosis.
INVESTIGATIONS
Echocardiography showed progression in the peak
and mean aortic valve gradient up to 86 and 49 mm Hg
(previously 60 and 31 mm Hg) and aortic valve area
1.0 cm2 (indexed aortic valve area: 0.6 cm2/m2). She
had concentric remodelling of left ventricle and
hyperdynamic ventricle with a small cavity (inter-
ventricular septum: 1.0 cm; posterior wall: 1.0 cm; LV
end-diastole diameter: 3.9 cm; LV end-systole diam-
eter: 2.1 cm; LV mass: 71 g/m2; LV relative wall thick-
ness: 0.51; LV end diastolic volume: 67 mL; LV end
systolic volume: 14.7 mL; LV ejection fraction: 78%).
Computed tomography TAVI demonstrated heavily
calciﬁed (Agatston score: 2,537), tri-leaﬂet aortic valve
with intrusive nodular annular calciﬁcation extending
into left ventricular outﬂow tract (Figure 1). Signiﬁcant
tortuosity was noted in the abdominal and descend-
ing
thoracic
aorta
secondary
to
kypho-scoliosis.
Ascending aorta was horizontal (Figure 2). Her Soci-
ety of Thoracic Surgeons’ score of operative mortality
in urgent isolated surgical aortic valve replacement
was 5.9% (intermediate risk). Considered together
with her frailty and severe kyphosis the Heart Team
consensus recommended TAVI in preference to sur-
gical aortic valve replacement.
MANAGEMENT AND PROCEDURAL DETAILS
After the Heart Team discussion, she was offered
transfemoral TAVI under local anesthesia and seda-
tion. The plan was to implant a 23-mm Edwards Sa-
pien 3 Ultra valve (Edwards Lifesciences) with 1 mL
less than nominal volume in view of adverse annular
calciﬁcation.
Initial attempts to place a Safari extra small curve
wire (Boston Scientiﬁc) through the pigtail catheter
proved unsuccessful as the catheter would prolapse
out of the LV as the curved Safari wire passed through
the tortuous aorta. The valve was recrossed and a
double curved Lunderquist stiff wire (Cook Medical)
was placed in the LV through a 6-F EBU 3.0 guiding
catheter (Medtronic). The position of the Lunderquist
wire curve was suboptimal but was accepted due to
the difﬁculties encountered in crossing this valve
(Figure 3). The TAVI valve system successfully passed
through the tortuous and calciﬁed aorta over the
supportive Lunderquist wire.
After predilation, a 23-mm Edwards Sapien 3 Ultra
valve was deployed under rapid pacing with no im-
mediate complications. There was trace aortic regur-
gitation on transthoracic echocardiogram immediate
post-deployment with no pericardial effusion. There
was no change to conduction on electrocardiogram.
Good hemostasis was achieved. The patient was
transferred to the coronary care unit for overnight
monitoring.
POSTPROCEDURAL COURSE AND MANAGEMENT
OF COMPLICATION
She remained well overnight but became abruptly
hypotensive next morning (around 18 h after pro-
cedure). A bedside echocardiogram showed a peri-
cardial effusion causing cardiac tamponade (Video 1,
Figure 4). She was taken back to the catheter labora-
tory for urgent pericardiocentesis. Pericardiocentesis
was performed under local anesthesia from the sub-
costal window under ﬂuoroscopic and ultrasound
guidance. Her hemodynamics improved after peri-
cardiocentesis. A left ventriculogram demonstrated
VISUAL SUMMARY
Timeline of the Case
Date
Events
Day 0
Transfemoral TAVR using 23 S3 balloon expandable valve in a 85 year old frail lady
Day 1
Cardiac tamponade, urgent pericardiocentesis
Day 1
Taken back to the cath lab, LV angiogram showed LV perforation. SurgiFlo
hemostatic matric inserted in pericardial cavity using agilis sheath.
Day 1
Shifted back to ICU, hemodynamically stable, pericardiac drain kept in situ.
Day 3
Pericardial drain removed, no reaccumulation of effusion on echocardiogram
Day 4
Discharged
Week 6
Follow-iup in clinic, TAVR functioning well on echocardiogram, no pericardial
effusion.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
TAVI = transcatheter aortic
valve implantation
LV = left ventricular
Chatterjee et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 5 , 2 0 2 5
Intervention for Left Ventricular Perforation
M A R C H 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 3
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
perforation of lateral LV wall with ongoing bleeding
into the pericardium (Video 2). An emergency Heart
Team meeting was convened in the catheter labora-
tory. Emergency surgery was considered but deemed
to be high risk. The decision was taken to attempt
percutaneous management by instilling Surgiﬂo He-
mostatic Matrix to control the bleeding.
The pericardial drain was swapped for a steerable
8.5-F Agilis sheath (Abbott Laboratories). The Agilis
sheath was steered and manipulated to position over
lateral
LV
wall
and
conﬁrmed
on
ﬂuoroscopy
(Figure 5). A total of 27 mL ﬂowable hemostatic matrix
(SURGIFLO Hemostatic Matrix) was instilled directly
through the Agilis sheath. Repeat echocardiogram
showed no reaccumulation of pericardial effusion.
FIGURE 1
CT TAVI: Annular and LVOT Calcium
CT ¼ computed tomography; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; TAVI ¼ transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
FIGURE 2
CT Reconstruction: Horizontal Tortuous Aorta
With Calciﬁcation
Abbreviations as in Figure 1.
FIGURE 3
Position of Stiff Wire in LV
LV ¼ left ventricle.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 5 , 2 0 2 5
Chatterjee et al
M A R C H 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 3
Intervention for Left Ventricular Perforation
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
We considered repeating the left ventriculogram, but
we did not want to raise the LV pressure with a
pressure injector and risk bleeding recurrence. The
pericardial drain was kept in situ for 48 h. After
conﬁrming no signiﬁcant residual pericardial effu-
sion, the drain was removed. She recovered well and
was
discharged
home
a
week
from
her
initial
admission.
FOLLOW-UP
She was reviewed in clinic 6 weeks after discharge.
She was well and had NYHA functional class 1 symp-
toms and was leading an active life. Her echocardio-
gram showed a well-seated TAVI valve with mild
paravalvular aortic regurgitation. Her LV function
was normal with no pericardial effusion.
DISCUSSION
Cardiac perforation and tamponade are serious and
potentially fatal complications after TAVI. Registry
data have shown that cardiac perforation and tam-
ponade, although relatively uncommon during TAVI,
have a very high morbidity.3,5 The outcomes in these
patients remain poor with high mortality rate even
with emergent cardiac surgery.3,6 Cardiac tamponade
during TAVI can be caused by the temporary pacing
wire in the right ventricle, the wire in the left
ventricle, or due to annular injury during valve
deployment. It has been noted that outcomes are
worse when the perforation is in the high pressure
left ventricle.6 In our case the positioning of the
Lunderquist wire in the left ventricle was difﬁcult
due to aortic tortuosity. A suboptimal wire position
was accepted, and the perforation was likely caused
by the tip of the Lunderquist wire. Emergency surgery
was thought to be high risk due to the patient’s frailty
and comorbidities. Thus, alternative percutaneous
option was considered in the ﬁrst instance. A percu-
taneous solution was pursued with consensus from
the Heart Team and with the patient’s consent. This
was deemed a reasonable option due to the unusual,
delayed presentation and a small defect noted on the
LV angiogram.
Owais et al7 have identiﬁed a small LV cavity size,
hypercontractile left ventricle, thin muscular wall,
FIGURE 4
Transthoracic Echocardiogram: Pericardial Effusion With Tamponade
FIGURE 5
Fluoroscopic Position of Agilis Sheath: Injection of
Surgical Glue in Pericardium
Chatterjee et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 5 , 2 0 2 5
Intervention for Left Ventricular Perforation
M A R C H 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 3
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
and narrow aorto-mitral angle as predictors of LV
perforation during TAVI. Small LV size is known to
predict worse outcomes after TAVI both at 30 days
and 2 years of follow-up.8,9 Our patient had a small
hypercontractile left ventricle and a narrow aorto-
mitral angle close to 90 degrees. The horizontal
tortuous
calciﬁed
aorta
necessitated
complex
manipulation of the guidewires in the ventricle.
Because of the anatomy, our guidewire position was
also directed toward the LV lateral wall.
A percutaneous technique was used to treat car-
diac perforation where surgical risk was considered
prohibitive. This technique has been described by
Jones et al,10 in tamponade developing after annular
rupture.
Directed
delivery
of
hemostatic
matrix
(SURGIFLO
Hemostatic
Matrix)
using
a
steerable
Agilis sheath was successful in sealing the perfora-
tion with a good outcome. Gelatin thrombin hemo-
static matrix provides a framework for the patient’s
platelets to aggregate, thus facilitating the coagula-
tion cascade. Piayda et al11 have described the role of
the ventricular muscle band with its circumferential
and transverse ﬁbers in sealing small, circular per-
forations.
There
remains
the
theoretical
risk
of
developing pericardial constriction in the future.
Close clinical and echocardiographic follow-up is
planned.
CONCLUSIONS
The challenging anatomy and suboptimal position
of the stiff wire in the left ventricle was the likely
reason for LV perforation. Intrapericardial Surgiﬂo
hemostatic matrix application sealed the perfora-
tion. Prompt interventional management led to a
good outcome in a high-risk situation. The Heart
Team discussion was helpful with colleagues from
other disciplines suggesting using the Agilis sheath
and
assisting
in
preparing
the
Surgiﬂo
for
instillation.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Krishnarpan
Chatterjee,
Academic
Cardiovascular
Unit,
James
Cook University Hospital, Marton Road, TS4 3BW
Middlesbrough, United Kingdom. E-mail: krishnarpan.
chatterjee@gmail.com. X handle: @KrishnarpanC.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021
ESC/EACTS Guidelines for the management of
valvular heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2022;43:561–
632.
2. Alsara O, Alsarah A, Laird-Fick H. Advanced age
and the clinical outcomes of transcatheter aortic
valve implantation. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2014;11:163–
170.
3. Eggebrecht H, Vaquerizo B, Moris C, et al.
Incidence and outcomes of emergent cardiac sur-
gery
during
transfemoral
transcatheter
aortic
valve implantation (TAVI): insights from the Eu-
ropean Registry on Emergent Cardiac Surgery
during TAVI (EuRECS-TAVI). Eur Heart J. 2018;39:
676–684.
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/
ehx713
4. Tackett SM, Calcaterra D, Magee G, Lattouf OM.
Real-world outcomes of hemostatic matrices in
cardiac
surgery.
J
Cardiothorac
Vasc
Anesth.
2014;28:1558–1565.
5. Liang Y, Dhoble A, Pakanati A, et al. Cata-
strophic cardiac events during transcatheter aortic
valve replacement. Can J Cardiol. 2021;37:1522–
1529. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2021.05.002
6. Rezq A, Basavarajaiah S, Latib A, et al. Inci-
dence, management, and outcomes of cardiac
tamponade during transcatheter aortic valve im-
plantation: a single-center study. JACC Cardiovasc
Interv. 2012;5:1264–1272. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcin.2012.08.012
7. Owais T, El Garhy M, Fuchs J, et al. Patho-
physiological factors associated with left ventric-
ular perforation
in
transcatheter
aortic
valve
implantation by transfemoral approach. J Heart
Valve Dis. 2017;26:430–436. PMID: 29302942.
8. Saito T, Inohara T, Yoshijima N, et al. Small left
ventricle and clinical outcomes after transcatheter
aortic valve replacement. J Am Heart Assoc.
2021;10:e019543.
https://doi.org/10.1161/jaha.
120.019543
9. Langer NB, Hamid NB, Nazif TM, et al. Injuries
to the aorta, aortic annulus, and left ventricle
during transcatheter aortic valve replacement:
management
and
outcomes.
Circ
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2017;10:e004735.
https://doi.org/10.
1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.116.004735
10. Jones A, Amirjamshidi H, Knight P, Ling FS,
Hisamoto K. Aortic annulus rupture after trans-
catheter
aortic
valve
replacement:
successful
management
of
a
dangerous
complication.
J Cardiothorac Surg. 2023;18:321. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13019-02302426-8
11. Piayda K, Hellhammer K, Veulemans V, et al.
Sealing capacity of the ventricular muscle band
after iatrogenic left ventricular perforation during
transcatheter aortic valve implantation. BMJ Case
Rep.
2018;2018:bcr-2018-225439.
https://doi.
org/10.1136/bcr2018-225439
KEY WORDS Agilis steerable introducer,
cardiac perforation, delayed cardiac
tamponade, SURGIFLO Hemostatic Matrix
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 5 , 2 0 2 5
Chatterjee et al
M A R C H 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 3
Intervention for Left Ventricular Perforation
5
