
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Non-ST-Segment Elevation 
Myocardial Infarction Secondary to 
Embolic Prosthetic Valve Thrombus
A Rare Post-Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement 
Complication
Avery Love, DO, a Alexander Bosley, MD, a Peter Rasmussen, MD, b Ramy Abdelmaseih, MD, b Khalil Anouti, MD, b 
Afaq Motiwala, MD, b Aiham Albaeni, MD b
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is most often caused by plaque rupture, but embolic thrombi from 
cardiac structures such as prosthetic valves represent a rare and underrecognized etiology.
CASE SUMMARY An 82-year-old female with a prior transcatheter aortic valve replacement presents with non-ST-
elevation myocardial infarction. Coronary angiography revealed a thrombus extending from the distal left main into the 
left circumflex artery, successfully treated with aspiration thrombectomy and angioplasty. Transesophageal echocar-
diography showed no thrombus, but cardiac CT revealed thrombi on all 3 prosthetic valve cusps. She was started on 
long-term anticoagulation.
DISCUSSION This case illustrates prosthetic valve leaflet thrombosis as an unusual cause of embolic ACS. It highlights 
the limitations of transesophageal echocardiography in detecting leaflet thrombus and the superior diagnostic value of 
cardiac computed tomography.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Clinicians should consider valve thrombosis in embolic ACS and recognize cardiac CT as the 
preferred imaging modality. Further studies are needed to guide anticoagulation strategy. (JACC Case Rep. 
2025;30:105756) Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an 
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 82-year-old woman presented to the hospital in 
March 2025 (Figure 1) reporting several weeks of 
intermittent chest discomfort and palpitations. She 
reported longstanding atypical chest pain over the
past few years, but her recent symptoms had changed 
in character and intensity.
On examination, her vital signs were stable, and 
the physical exam was noncontributory. She 
described her pain as pressure-like, located in the 
epigastric region, occasionally radiating down her
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105756
From the a Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA; and the b Department of 
Cardiology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received June 10, 2025; revised manuscript received July 11, 2025, accepted August 27, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 7 , 2 0 2 5
P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R T H E
C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
abdomen. Her pain was nonexertional and 
was reproducible with palpation.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
Severe aortic stenosis treated with trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) in 
July 2023, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with 
elective Watchman device placement in April 
2024 due to moderate fall risk, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction 
(left ventricular ejection fraction 55%-60%), 
and chronic anemia.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Given the patient’s symptoms of intermittent chest 
discomfort and palpitations, along with a history of 
TAVR, atrial fibrillation, and cardiovascular comor-
bidities, the differential diagnosis included atypical 
angina or myocardial ischemia, arrhythmia-related 
symptoms, and coronary embolism; gastrointes-
tinal causes such as reflux or peptic ulcer disease; 
musculoskeletal chest wall pain given reproduc-
ibility with palpation; and less likely but critical 
considerations 
such 
as 
pulmonary 
embolism, 
aortic pathology, or progression of structural heart 
disease.
INVESTIGATIONS
Initial electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm/si-
nus tachycardia with nonspecific ST changes, and 
serial troponins were elevated.
Coronary angiography demonstrated a thrombus 
extending from the distal left main coronary artery 
into the proximal left circumflex artery in the 
absence of obstructive coronary artery disease, sug-
gestive of embolic etiology (Figure 2). Optical coher-
ence tomography further confirmed embolic etiology 
rather than a plaque rupture. The lesion was suc-
cessfully treated with aspiration thrombectomy and 
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (Figure 3).
FIGURE 1 Timeline of Events Summarizing the Key Cardiovascular Interventions and 
the Clinical Presentation in This Case
The patient underwent transcatheter aortic valve replacement in July 2023 and 
Watchman device placement in April 2024 for atrial fibrillation and fall risk. She 
subsequently presented in March 2025 with non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction, 
ultimately found to be caused by embolic thrombus from prosthetic valve leaflet 
thrombosis.
FIGURE 2 Coronary Angiogram Showing a Discrete 
Intraluminal Filling Defect Consistent With Thrombus 
(Yellow Arrow) Occupying the Distal Left Main Coronary 
Artery and Propagating Into the Ostial–Proximal Left 
Circumflex Artery
The metallic stent frame of the transcatheter aortic valve 
prosthesis is faintly visible in the aortic root (left), supporting 
an embolic origin from the prosthetic valve.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Prosthetic valve leaflet thrombosis should 
be considered as a potential source of cor-
onary embolism in patients with embolic 
acute coronary syndrome, particularly in the 
setting of prior transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement.
• Cardiac computed tomography is the imag-
ing modality of choice for detecting valve 
leaflet thrombus when transesophageal 
echocardiography is inconclusive, and anti-
coagulation management should be individ-
ualized based on patient history and 
evolving evidence.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
ACS = acute coronary
syndrome
CT = computed tomography
DOAC = direct oral
anticoagulant
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
VKA = vitamin K antagonist
Love et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 7 , 2 0 2 5
NSTEMI from Prosthetic Valve Thrombus After TAVR 
N O V E M B E R 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 7 5 6
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Subsequently, transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE) was obtained, which did not reveal any cardiac 
source of embolization. Due to the high clinical sus-
picion for an embolic source, a cardiac computed 
tomography (CT) scan was performed. The CT 
revealed hypoattenuated masses on all 3 cusps of the 
bioprosthetic aortic valve, consistent with leaflet 
thrombi (Figure 4). Multiple transthoracic echocar-
diograms obtained during routine follow-up between 
her TAVR procedure in July 2023 and this hospitali-
zation in March 2025 showed no evidence of valve 
dysfunction or leaflet thrombosis.
MANAGEMENT
Following identification of an embolic coronary 
event likely originating from the bioprosthetic aortic 
valve, the patient was started on anticoagulation 
therapy. She received intravenous unfractionated 
heparin during hospitalization and was transitioned 
to long-term oral anticoagulation with apixaban. She 
was discharged in stable condition with plans for 
close outpatient follow-up.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
Since discharge, the patient has been followed up in 
outpatient cardiology clinic. She reported no recur-
rence of chest discomfort, palpitations, or other 
ischemic symptoms. She has been tolerating apix-
aban well, with no reported episodes of bleeding or 
adverse effects. At the time of follow-up, she 
remained clinically stable and functionally improved 
compared to her hospitalization. No follow-up im-
aging has yet been performed to reassess the status of 
the prosthetic valve thrombus, but outpatient cardiac 
CT is planned for further evaluation. Continued 
monitoring of anticoagulation and surveillance im-
aging is anticipated as part of her long-term man-
agement strategy.
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is typically caused 
by plaque disruption or erosion of an unstable coro-
nary artery atherosclerotic plaque. Less commonly, 
ACS may result from coronary embolism, spasm, or 
dissection. Coronary embolism accounts for approx-
imately 2.9% of de novo ACS cases, with atrial 
fibrillation being the most common cause. Embolic 
events originating from cardiac structures such as 
prosthetic valves or tumors are rare but clinically 
significant due to their recurrent potential. 1,2
TAVR has increasingly supplanted surgical aortic 
valve replacement, particularly in older and high-risk 
patients. With its rising use, valve-related complica-
tions such as leaflet thrombosis are gaining clinical 
attention. These events may present silently or, as in
rare cases, with systemic embolism and myocardial 
infarction. 3,4
Current American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association guidelines recommend vitamin K 
antagonists (VKAs) as first-line therapy for valve 
thrombosis in patients with concurrent atrial fibril-
lation. However, emerging evidence suggests that 
direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) may offer similar
FIGURE 4 Electrocardiogram-Gated Contrast Cardiac Computed Tomography 
Illustrating Hypoattenuated Leaflet Thickening (HALT) of a Transcatheter 
Bioprosthetic Aortic Valve
Sagittal (left) and axial (right) reformats show low-density material coating the inflow 
surfaces of all 3 cusps (yellow arrows), consistent with leaflet-level thrombus. The 
circumferential thrombotic burden explains the restricted leaflet motion on 
echocardiography and served as the presumed embolic source of the downstream 
coronary occlusion.
FIGURE 3 Left: Intravascular Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) Demonstrating 
an Embolized Prosthetic-Valve Thrombus
The cross-sectional view (top) shows a lobulated, highly back-scattering intraluminal 
mass (asterisks) eccentrically compressing the lumen; the external elastic lamina 
(yellow arrows) is preserved circumferentially, excluding atherosclerotic plaque. 
Longitudinal reconstruction (bottom) localizes the thrombus to a 5.9-mm segment with 
a minimal-lumen area of 3.16 mm 2 (mean diameter 1.97 mm). Right: Gross specimen of 
the embolic material removed by manual aspiration thrombectomy (yellow circle).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 7 , 2 0 2 5 
Love et al
N O V E M B E R 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 7 5 6 
NSTEMI from Prosthetic Valve Thrombus After TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
efficacy, although this remains an area of clinical 
uncertainty. 5,6
DISCUSSION
This case illustrates a rare but important complica-
tion of TAVR: prosthetic valve leaflet thrombosis 
leading to embolic ACS. While coronary embolism 
has been reported in up to 3% of ACS, the subset 
related specifically to valve thrombi remains rare and 
poorly characterized in large registries. 3 As TAVR 
surpasses surgical aortic valve replacement in vol-
ume, especially among elderly and high-risk patients, 
the burden of such valve-related complications is 
expected to rise. 7
Leaflet thrombosis post TAVR often presents 
silently and may only be detected through imaging as 
hypoattenuated leaflet thickening (HALT). In most 
instances, HALT is incidental; however, in rare cases 
such as this, the thrombus may embolize and cause 
significant end-organ ischemia, including myocardial 
infarction. The embolic territory in this case—the 
distal left main extending into the left circumflex— 
poses particularly high risk of hemodynamic 
compromise. Although initial angiography may 
appear nonobstructive, the embolic nature of the 
thrombus becomes clear with detailed imaging and 
clinical context.
Diagnostic imaging plays a pivotal role in these 
cases. While TEE is often used for assessing for 
intracardiac sources of embolization, it has limited 
ability to visualize prosthetic aortic valve leaflets due 
to acoustic shadowing and suboptimal angles. 
Routine transthoracic echocardiogram surveillance 
in this patient similarly failed to detect leaflet 
thrombus, further underscoring the limited sensi-
tivity of echocardiograph. Cardiac CT, by contrast, 
provides high-resolution visualization of leaflet mo-
tion and morphology and has become the gold stan-
dard for detecting HALT and reduced leaflet 
motion. 8,9
Therapeutic decision-making in TAVR-related 
thrombosis remains an evolving area. Although 
VKAs have long been favored, especially in patients 
with coexisting atrial fibrillation, data comparing
VKAs to DOACs remain inconclusive. Observational 
studies and subgroup analyses have demonstrated 
both resolution and recurrence with DOAC use, sug-
gesting the need for individualized decisions and 
further prospective trials. 5,6,10 In this patient, apix-
aban was specifically chosen based on several con-
siderations: her favorable prior experience and 
tolerability before the Watchman device implanta-
tion, moderate fall risk prompting the original choice 
of DOAC over VKA, and the presence of the 
Watchman device which significantly reduced stroke 
risk and partially mitigated the need for VKAs. 
Balancing thrombotic risk with her bleeding risk 
profile and prior clinical experience justified our de-
cision. Nonetheless, anticoagulation management 
post TAVR thrombosis remains an area of uncer-
tainty, underscoring the need for individualized 
therapy pending more definitive prospective trial 
data.
CONCLUSIONS
This case underscores the importance of considering 
embolic etiologies in patients presenting with ACS, 
particularly prosthetic heart valves or atrial 
appendage occlusion devices. Prosthetic valve leaflet 
thrombosis, although rare, can lead to coronary em-
bolism and ACS. When TEE is inconclusive, cardiac 
CT should be pursued for accurate visualization of 
valve structures. Early recognition of this complica-
tion is critical, as it has significant therapeutic im-
plications. While VKAs remain the standard for 
treatment, DOACs provide comparable efficacy, 
although this is an area of ongoing investigation.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Avery Love,
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, 301 University Blvd. 4.174 John 
Sealy Annex, Galveston, TX 77555-0566, USA. E-mail: 
anlove@utmb.edu.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Rao S, O’Donoghue M, Ruel M, et al. 2025 ACC/ 
AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI guideline for the man-
agement of patients with acute coronary syn-
dromes: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association joint 
committee on clinical practice guidelines. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2025;85(22):2135–2237. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jacc.2024.11.009
2. Shibata T, Kawakami S, Noguchi T, et al. Prev-
alence, clinical features, and prognosis of acute 
myocardial infarction attributable to coronary
artery embolism. Circulation. 2015;132(4):241– 
250. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
114.015134
3. Al-Taweel O, Sami F, Pinsky S, Wineinger T, 
Berbarie RF. Coronary embolism presenting as
Love et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 7 , 2 0 2 5
NSTEMI from Prosthetic Valve Thrombus After TAVR 
N O V E M B E R 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 7 5 6
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
NSTEMI in a patient with splenectomy. Kans J 
Med. 2021;14(1):111–113. https://doi.org/10.17161/ 
kjm.vol1414823
4. Carroll JD, Mack MJ, Vemulapalli S, et al. STS-
ACC TVT registry of transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76(21):2492– 
2516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.09.595
5. Otto C, Nishimura R, Bonow RO, Carabello BA, 
Erwin JP 3rd, Gentile F, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA 
guideline for the management of patients with 
valvular heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77(4):e25–e197. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.11.018
6. Didier R, Lhermusier T, Auffret V, et al. 
TAVR 
patients 
requiring 
anticoagulation: 
direct oral anticoagulant or vitamin K 
antagonist? JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2021;14 
(15):1704–1713. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin. 
2021.05.025
7. Mori M, Gupta A, Wang Y, et al. Trends in 
transcatheter and surgical aortic valve replace-
ment among older adults in the United States. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78(22):2161–2172. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2021.09.855
8. Abadie BQ, Wang TKM. Contemporary multi-
modality imaging of prosthetic aortic valves. Rev 
Cardiovasc Med. 2025;26(1):25339. https://doi. 
org/10.31083/RCM25339
9. Goel K, Lindman BR. Hypoattenuated leaflet 
thickening after transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment: expanding the evidence base but questions 
remain. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019;12(12): 
e010151. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.119. 
010151
10. Adrichem R, Rodes Cabau J, Mehran R, et al. 
Treatment of transcatheter aortic valve throm-
bosis: JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2024;84(9):848–861. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.jacc.2024.05.064
KEY WORDS cardiac CT, embolic 
myocardial infarction, NSTEMI, TAVR, valve 
thrombosis
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 7 , 2 0 2 5 
Love et al
N O V E M B E R 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 7 5 6 
NSTEMI from Prosthetic Valve Thrombus After TAVR
5
