
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Transseptal Access Through Prior Atrial 
Septal Occluder Device for TMVR for 
Prosthetic Mitral Valve Degeneration
Tiberio M. Frisoli, MD, a Muhammad Ahmad Qureshi, MD, b Gennaro Giustino, MD, a Sammi Dali, MD, a 
Brian P. O’Neill, MD, a Pedro E. Gonzalez, MD, a Pedro A. Villablanca, MD, a William W. O’Neill, MD, a 
James C. Lee, MD a
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Transseptal access is critical for transcatheter mitral valve replacement (TMVR), but prior septal 
occlusion can complicate reinterventions.
CASE SUMMARY A 62-year-old woman with dyspnea and severe mitral stenosis of a degenerated M3 bioprosthetic 
valve underwent valve-in-valve TMVR with access achieved through a previously implanted 30-mm Cardioform Septal 
Occluder using an electrocauterized wire and Brockenbrough needle, followed by balloon dilatations. A 29-mm SAPIEN 
3 valve was implanted, reducing the mitral gradient from 19 to 2 mm Hg. A residual left-to-right shunt was left un-
treated. The patient was discharged the next day without complications.
DISCUSSION TMVR with a balloon-expandable TAVR platform can be performed safely and effectively through a 
Cardioform Septal Occluder and is facilitated by predilatation of the Cardioform Septal Occluder with a large balloon.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Transseptal access through a Cardioform Septal Occluder is feasible for valve-in-valve TMVR. 
Awareness of strategies to manage prior interatrial septum closures is crucial as repeat mitral interventions become more 
common. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105373) © 2025 THe Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
T 
ranscatheter 
mitral 
valve 
replacement 
(TMVR) has become an important treatment 
option for patients with degenerated 
bioprosthetic mitral valves, particularly patients 
who are considered a high risk for surgery. 1,2 Howev-
er, in cases where patients have undergone prior 
transcatheter or surgical procedures involving the 
interatrial septum (IAS), achieving transseptal access
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Transseptal access through a Cardioform 
Septal Occluder is feasible for valve-in-
valve TMVR.
• Awareness of strategies to manage prior IAS 
closures is crucial as repeat mitral 
interventions become more common.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105373
From the a Center for Structural Heart Disease, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, USA; and the b Department of In-
ternal Medicine, Henry Ford Jackson Hospital, Jackson, Michigan, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received April 1, 2025; revised manuscript received July 8, 2025, accepted July 22, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
for valve-in-valve TMVR can present signifi-
cant technical challenges. Percutaneous 
septal occluders, such as the Cardioform 
Septal Occluder (W.L. Gore & Associates) and 
Amplatzer Septal Occluder (Abbott Struc-
tural), are frequently used to close congenital 
or iatrogenic atrial septal defects. Whereas these de-
vices effectively prevent right-to-left shunt, they also 
pose an obstacle for subsequent transseptal 
interventions. 3
Previous reports have described successful 
transseptal 
puncture 
through 
an 
Amplatzer 
occluder to facilitate mitral valve interventions, 
demonstrating that access through such devices is 
feasible. 4 However, to our knowledge, there are no 
published cases to date describing TMVR performed 
through a previously implanted Cardioform Septal 
Occluder. In this report, we present the case of a 
62-year-old woman with severe mitral stenosis due 
to a degenerated M3 bioprosthetic valve (Edwards 
Lifesciences). She underwent valve-in-valve TMVR, 
with transseptal access achieved through an 
implanted Cardioform device. This case highlights 
the feasibility and safety of this approach and un-
derscores its potential relevance for future redo 
TMVR procedures in patients with prior septal 
occluders.
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 62-year-old woman with 6 months of dyspnea 
progressing to NYHA functional class III severity was 
evaluated for treatment of severe mitral stenosis of a 
degenerated M3 bioprosthetic valve implanted 
5 years prior. At presentation, she appeared fatigued 
but in no distress. Vital signs were stable. Cardio-
vascular examination revealed a diastolic rumble at 
the apex. Lungs had faint bibasilar crackles. No
edema, clubbing, or cyanosis was detected. Her 
abdomen was soft and nontender.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a degenerated M3 bioprosthetic 
mitral valve implanted 5 years prior for severe mitral 
disease. At the time of implantation, she had severe 
tricuspid regurgitation, which led to right-to-left 
shunt and hypoxia following the TMVR procedure. 
To address this, a 30-mm Cardioform Septal Occluder 
was implanted to close the resulting iatrogenic atrial 
septal defect.
INVESTIGATIONS
An echocardiogram showed that 2 of the 3 prosthetic 
mitral valve leaflets were thickened and immobile, 
whereas the anteromedial leaflet opened normally. 
The valve was severely stenosed, with a peak velocity 
of 2.42 m/s, a mean gradient of 12 mm Hg, and a valve
area of 0.69 to 0.86 cm 2 .
MANAGEMENT
The heart team planned a transcatheter valve-in-
valve TMVR with a 29-mm SAPIEN 3 valve (Edwards 
Lifesciences) via the previously implanted Cardio-
form Septal Occluder. Under general anesthesia with 
fluoroscopic and transesophageal guidance, an elec-
trocauterized 0.014-inch wire (70 J) was delivered 
through a Brockenbrough extra sharp needle (St Jude 
Medical) via the Cardioform device into the pulmo-
nary vein, and serial coronary noncompliant balloon 
dilatations of the Cardioform device were performed 
up to 5 mm (Figures 1A to 1D). A 5-F Shuttle sheath 
was delivered into the pulmonary vein and was used 
to deliver a 0.035-wire into the left atrium, over 
which the balloon dilatation of the Cardioform device
VISUAL SUMMARY
Timeline of the Case
Timeline
Events
Day 1
A 62-year-old woman presented with NHYA functional class III symptoms. An echocardiogram showed 2 of 3 thick prosthetic mitral valve 
leaflets. The valve was severely stenosed.
Day 24
The heart team planned a valve-in-valve transcatheter mitral valve replacement with a 29-mm SAPIEN 3 via the previously implanted 
Cardioform Septal Occluder.
Day 97
The patient underwent valve-in-valve transcatheter mitral valve replacement via a previously implanted 30-mm Cardioform Septal 
Occluder. Under general anesthesia with fluoroscopic and transesophageal echocardiographic guidance, transseptal access was 
achieved using an electrocauterized wire and a Brockenbrough needle. Serial balloon dilatations of the Cardioform device facilitated 
the passage of a 29-mm SAPIEN 3 valve, successfully reducing the transmitral gradient from 19 mm Hg to 2 mm Hg. The residual 
interatrial communication was left open because of left-to-right shunt.
Day 98
The patient was discharged home with improvement in shortness of breath after an echocardiogram.
Day 106
NYHA functional class I-II symptoms were reported in the clinic.
Day 413
The patient reported no orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, or shortness of breath.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
IAS = interatrial septum
TMVR = transcatheter mitral
valve replacement
Frisoli et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5
TMVR After Failed M3 Using Gore Occluder Access 
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 7 3
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
was performed with a 14-mm Armada and then 24-
mm Vida valvuloplasty balloon (Figure 1E). The final 
right anterior oblique cranial projection confirmed 
successful traversal of the 5-F Shuttle sheath just 
inferior and posterior to the central hub of the Car-
dioform device, with the sheath tip positioned across 
the mitral valve (Figure 2). A 24-mm Vida valvulo-
plasty balloon was chosen because of the waist seen 
on the 14-mm Armada balloon, the expected recoil of 
the Cardioform device and the fact that a crimped 29-
mm SAPIEN 3 can be about 7 to 8 mm in diameter 
(Figure 3, Video 1). The maximum pressure applied to 
the 24-mm balloon was about 6 atm. The SAPIEN 3 
device was then advanced seamlessly through the 
Cardioform device (Figure 1F, Video 2). Supplemental 
Figure 1 shows a mitral valve protocol computed to-
mography image of the septum.
The TMVR was then performed as usual, reducing 
the transesophageal echocardiography–derived mean 
transmitral gradient from 19 mm Hg to 2 mm Hg.
FIGURE 1 Transseptal Access and Balloon Dilatation of the Cardioform Septal Occluder
(A to D) Electrocauterized 0.014-inch wire and serial balloon dilatations of the Cardioform device to 5 mm. (E) Balloon dilatation with 14-mm Armada and 24-mm Vida 
valvuloplasty balloons. (F) Advancement of the 29-mm SAPIEN 3 device through the Cardioform device.
FIGURE 2 Right Anterior Oblique Cranial Projection Showing the 5-F 
Shuttle Sheath Traversing Just Inferior and Posterior to the Central 
Hub of the Cardioform Septal Occluder With Its Tip Successfully 
Crossing the Mitral Valve
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5 
Frisoli et al
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 7 3 
TMVR After Failed M3 Using Gore Occluder Access
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
The defect in the Cardioform device was left open 
because of left-to-right shunt (Figures 4A and 4B). 
The patient was discharged the next day after trans-
thoracic echocardiography.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
At a follow-up clinic visit 8 days later, the patient 
reported significant improvement in her symptoms. 
More than a year later at another follow-up visit, she 
reported that she had not experienced any additional 
symptoms.
DISCUSSION
Performing TMVR in patients with a previous IAS 
closure, such as with a Cardioform Septal Occluder,
presents challenges, as these devices create an 
additional barrier for transseptal puncture and de-
vice delivery. A prior study reported successful left 
atrial appendage closure using an Amplatzer atrial 
septal occluder. 3 Our group previously demonstrated 
the feasibility of transseptal puncture through an 
Amplatzer IAS occluder for performing mitral valve 
edge-to-edge repair. 4 To our knowledge, this is the 
first report of TMVR through a Cardioform Septal 
Occluder. The presence of a percutaneous IAS closure 
device makes transseptal puncture and delivery of 
devices across the IAS more challenging; however, 
this case demonstrates its feasibility and safety. 
Considering the growing volume of transcatheter 
mitral interventions, there will be an increasing need 
to obtain transseptal access through a previously
FIGURE 4
Continuous-Wave Doppler Showing Left-to-Right Shunt Across Iatrogenic Atrial Septal Defect
(A) Two-dimensional and color Doppler imaging showing flow across the interatrial septum. (B) Continuous-wave Doppler confirming left-to-right shunting across 
the defect.
FIGURE 3
Transesophageal Echocardiography Image of 14-mm Armada Deployed Across the Cardioform Septal Occluder Seen on X-Plane View
Frisoli et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5
TMVR After Failed M3 Using Gore Occluder Access 
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 7 3
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
deployed IAS device. Therefore, reaccess through a 
Cardioform device should be considered a viable 
option for redo TMVR.
CONCLUSIONS
This case highlights the feasibility and safety of 
performing TMVR through a previously implanted
Cardioform Septal Occluder. This case demonstrates 
the feasibility and safety of reaccessing the IAS 
through a Cardioform Septal Occluder for redo 
TMVR, highlighting its potential as a viable option for 
transseptal interventions, even when a relatively 
large septostomy is required.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Muhammad
Ahmad Qureshi, 650 South Alpine Lake Drive, 
Apartment E, Jackson, Michigan 49203, USA. E-mail: 
ahmadqur267@gmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Guerrero M, Urena M, Himbert D, et al. 1-year 
outcomes of transcatheter mitral valve replace-
ment in patients with severe mitral annular 
calcification. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71(17):1841– 
1853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2018.02.054
2. Cheung A, Webb JG, Wong DR, et al. Trans-
apical 
transcatheter 
mitral 
valve-in-valve 
implantation in a human. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2009;87(3):e18–e20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
athoracsur.2008.10.016
3. Gloekler S, Shakir S, Meier B. Transseptal 
puncture through amplatzer atrial septal occluder 
for left atrial appendage closure. JACC Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2017;10(21):2222–2223. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.jcin.2017.04.038
4. Villablanca PA, Lee J, Wang DD, et al. Trans-
septal puncture through an amplatzer atrial septal 
occluder for edge-to-edge repair with MitraClip NTr 
system. Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2020;21(11S):63– 
64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carrev.2020.02.021
KEY WORDS Cardioform Septal Occluder, 
septal occluder device, transcatheter mitral 
valve replacement (TMVR), transseptal 
access, valve-in-valve
APPENDIX For supplemental videos and
a figure, please see the online version of this 
paper.
EQUIPMENT LIST
1. 30-mm Cardioform Septal Occluder (W.L. Gore & Associates)
2. Brockenbrough extra sharp needle (St. Jude Medical)
3. 0.014-inch electrocauterized wire (70 J) (Asahi Intecc Medical)
4. 5-F Shuttle sheath (Cook Medical)
5. 0.035-inch wire (Boston Scientific)
6. 14-mm Armada balloon (Cordis Corporation)
7. 24-mm Vida valvuloplasty balloon (Medtronic)
8. 29-mm SAPIEN 3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences)
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5 
Frisoli et al
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 7 3 
TMVR After Failed M3 Using Gore Occluder Access
5
