
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
HOW WE DID IT
Balloon-Assisted Leaflet Laceration 
to Prevent Coronary Obstruction 
During TAVR
Step-by-Step Modified UNICORN
Gennaro Giustino, MD, Robert Kipperman, MD, Kostantinos Koulogiannis, MD, John Brown III, MD, 
Philippe Genereux, MD
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVES Coronary obstruction (CO) is a life-threatening complication of transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
(TAVR). Undermining iatrogenic coronary obstruction with radiofrequency needle (UNICORN) has been recently 
described as a novel strategy to prevent CO during TAVR. We describe here the step-by-step technique of a modified 
version of UNICORN.
KEY STEPS First, the target leaflet is traversed using transcatheter electrosurgery with a 0.014-inch wire. After 
successful leaflet traversal, the leaflet is first ballooned with a noncompliant coronary balloon. Then, the wire is 
exchanged with a stiff 0.035-inch wire. Over a 0.035-inch wire, the leaflet is completely lacerated with a large non-
compliant balloon, and finally the transcatheter heart valve is implanted.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS Electrosurgical traversal of the target aortic valve leaflet should be performed meticulously in 
the intended location and in front of the coronary ostium. After leaflet laceration, severe aortic regurgitation may result 
in hemodynamic instability. Cerebral embolic protection should always be used during leaflet modification.
CONCLUSIONS Modified UNICORN is a viable alternative strategy to prevent CO during high-risk TAVR. Further 
data are needed to define its efficacy and safety. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:104431) © 2025 The Authors. 
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article 
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
C 
oronary obstruction (CO) is a rare but life-
threatening complication of transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement (TAVR). 1-3 The 
risk of CO can be predicted by preoperative cardiac 
computed tomography (CT) and has been reported 
to be higher during valve-in-valve TAVR compared
with TAVR in native aortic valves. 1-3 In general, CO 
during TAVR can occur because of direct obstruction,
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• CO is a life-threatening complication of 
TAVR.
• UNICORN is a viable alternative strategy to 
prevent CO during TAVR in patients at high-
risk for this complication.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104431
From the Gagnon Cardiovascular Institute, Atlantic Health System, Morristown, New Jersey, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received January 15, 2025; revised manuscript received January 29, 2025, accepted February 5, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N 
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R 
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
in which the native or bioprosthetic valve 
leaflet is displaced toward the coronary ostia
causing its direct occlusion, or indirect
obstruction, in which the displaced leaflet
sequestrates the sinus of Valsalva by inter-
acting with a low or narrow sinotubular 
junction. 1,3 
The most frequently adopted techniques 
to prevent CO during TAVR are chimney or
snorkeling stenting 4 and bioprosthetic or
native aortic scallop intentional laceration to
prevent iatrogenic coronary artery obstruc-
tion (BASILICA). 5 Chimney stenting consists
of the implantation of a stent in the coronary
ostium protruding in the ascending aorta to
maintain 
proximal 
coronary 
patency.
Conversely, BASILICA consists of the elec-
trosurgical traversal and laceration of a cor-
onary 
leaflet. 6 
Major 
downsides 
of
snorkeling stenting include stent distortion, 
restenosis, thrombosis, and sometimes prohibitive 
coronary reaccess, which is particularly problematic 
for future planning of valve-in-valve procedures. 7 On 
the other hand, downsides of BASILICA include the 
technical complexity and substantial learning curve 
and sometimes inadequate leaflet splay requiring 
bailout coronary reaccess and stenting. Recently, 
undermining iatrogenic coronary obstruction with 
radiofrequency 
needle 
(UNICORN) 
has 
been
described as a novel strategy to prevent CO during 
TAVR. 8 In its original description, the target leaflet 
was traversed with a 0.035-inch radiofrequency wire 
and then progressively dilated with a balloon to allow 
the intraleaflet implantation of a balloon-expandable 
valve. In the current article, we describe a technique 
that incorporates elements of BASILICA to perform 
leaflet traversal followed by balloon-assisted leaflet 
laceration and subsequent valve implantation.
CASE SUMMARIES
We present 3 cases in which we applied a modified 
technique of UNICORN to prevent CO during valve-
in-valve TAVR. All patients presented in acute 
decompensated heart failure. Two were found to 
have a degenerated Magna Ease valve (Edwards 
Lifesciences) (both had 20-mm valves), and 1 patient 
had a degenerated 26-mm Evolut valve (Medtronic). 
All patients were women. The mean Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons mortality score was 12.3%. All 
patients had preserved left ventricular ejection frac-
tion and had severe stenosis with an average peak 
velocity of 5 m/s and mean gradient of 49 mm Hg. In 
all patients, the left main coronary artery was at risk 
with a mean height of 3.7 mm and a mean virtual 
valve-to-coronary distance of 3.3 mm. In 2 patients, 
the right coronary artery was deemed to be at inter-
mediate risk and we opted for coronary protection
VISUAL SUMMARY Schematic Diagram of the Steps and Setup for Modified UNICORN During Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
LCC = left coronary cusp; RCC = right coronary cusp; UNICORN = undermining iatrogenic coronary obstruction with radiofrequency needle.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
BASILICA = bioprosthetic or
native aortic scallop 
intentional laceration to 
prevent iatrogenic coronary 
artery obstruction
CO = coronary obstruction 
CT = computed tomography
LVOT = left ventricular
outflow tract
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
UNICORN = undermining
iatrogenic coronary
obstruction with 
radiofrequency needle
Giustino et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR With Modified UNICORN
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 4 3 1
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
with a drug-eluting stent and bailout snorkeling stent 
if necessary. In another patient (patient 2), the right 
coronary artery was chronically occluded in the 
proximal segment. All patients had anatomy suitable 
for transfemoral access and for cerebral embolic 
protection on preoperative CT. All patients under-
went valve-in-valve TAVR with a 20-mm S3 valve.
PROCEDURAL STEPS
PREPROCEDURAL ASSESSMENT. Cardiac CT is crit-
ical for preprocedural planning of TAVR with leaflet 
modification. 1 First, CO risk needs to be character-
ized, as previously described. 1 The aortic valve 
annular plane should be first defined using 3-point 
technique as during any TAVR planning. Then, cor-
onary height, leaflet length and calcification, virtual 
valve-to-coronary and virtual valve-to-sinotubular 
junction distance (for valve-in-valve TAVR) should 
be measured (Figure 1). In general, a valve-to-
coronary distance <3 to 4 mm or a leaflet length 
that exceeds coronary height are considered high-
risk features for CO. 1,2 Conversely, the valve-to-
sinotubular junction is critical when close to zero, 
as the outward displacement of the bioprosthetic 
leaflet would lead to blood flow sequestration of the 
coronary sinuses. For valve-in-valve TAVR, commis-
sural alignment should also be evaluated, as leaflet 
laceration may be ineffective with severe misalign-
ment. As with BASILICA, in preparation of UNICORN, 
the CT projection angles for leaflet traversal should 
be evaluated for each target leaflet: 1) side view to
project the coronary artery tangential to the leaflet; 
and 2) front view to project the coronary artery at the 
center of the leaflet. The aortic arch anatomy should 
be assessed to plan for cerebral embolic protection 
use.
EQUIPMENT. The equipment used for left coronary 
cusp or right coronary cusp UNICORN is listed in 
Table 1. The steps of a modified UNICORN technique 
are summarized in Table 2.
ELECTROSURGICAL LEAFLET TRAVERSAL. The first
step of this technique is similar to what has been 
previously described for BASILICA. 6 However, in 
contrast to BASILICA, there is no need to cross the 
aortic valve retrogradely and position a Goose Neck 
snare (Medtronic) in the left ventricular outflow tract 
(LVOT). In addition, leaflet traversal can be per-
formed directly from the valve delivery sheath (eg, 
an E-sheath for balloon-expandable valves or a Gore 
DrySeal for self-expanding valves), as the wire used 
for leaflet laceration will serve to deliver the trans-
catheter heart valve (THV). The cusp plane should be 
first defined with 2 cusp injections through the guide 
catheter (Figures 2A and 2B): one injection along the 
side view of the target vessel to ensure the catheter is 
directed toward the base of the leaflet and one in the 
front view to ensure the catheter is directed in front 
of the coronary ostia. Then, a 0.014-inch Astato XS 20 
guidewire (Asahi Intecc USA, Inc) is advanced within 
a microcatheter to the target leaflet hinge point un-
der angiographic guidance. The back end of the 
Astato wire is denuded using a scalpel blade, which is
FIGURE 1 Preoperative Cardiac Computed Tomography Assessment of Coronary Obstruction Risk
In case 1, the left and right coronary arteries had a height <10 mm; however, the valve-to-coronary distance was 3.7 mm (high risk) on the left side and 5.0 mm on the 
right side. In case 2, both left and right coronary arteries were at high risk for sinus sequestration (however, the right coronary artery was completely occluded 
proximally). In case 3, both coronary arteries had a height <10 mm and a valve-to-coronary distance <4 mm. LC = left cusp; LCA = left coronary artery;
NC = noncoronary cusp; RC = right cusp; RCA = right coronary artery; STJ = sinotubular junction.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Giustino et al 
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 4 3 1
TAVR With Modified UNICORN
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
then clamped to an electrosurgical pencil set with 
“cut” mode at 50 to 70 W. After confirming the po-
sition with transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
(Figure 3), the wire is electrified and advanced 
through the leaflet into the LVOT and left ventricle.
BALLOON-ASSISTED 
LEAFLET 
LACERATION.
Appropriate leaflet traversal can be confirmed using 
TEE visualizing the wire through the leaflet across 
the LVOT. Then, over the 0.014-inch wire a first 
dilatation of the leaflet can be performed using a 4.0 
or 5.0 × 30 mm noncompliant balloon (Figure 4, 
Video 1). Following the first balloon inflation, the
0.014-inch wire is exchanged with a preshaped stiff 
0.035-inch wire (eg, Confida guidewire) using a 
0.035-inch compatible microcatheter (eg, Quick-
Cross catheter). Over the stiff 0.035-inch wire, a 
noncompliant 16-mm balloon (eg, True Dilation val-
vuloplasty balloon) is advanced across the leaflet 
hole created with the coronary balloon. This balloon 
will be used to complete the leaflet laceration 
(Video 2). Then, the balloon is inflated under fluoro-
scopic guidance, and the leaflet is completely lacer-
ated. A waist can be appreciated fluoroscopically 
confirming that the balloon is being inflated within 
the leaflet (Figure 4).
VALVE IMPLANTATION. The THV should be pre-
pared and ready before the second balloon inflation 
and leaflet laceration. Following leaflet laceration, 
the balloon should be rapidly removed from the body 
maintaining the preshaped 0.035-inch wire in the left 
ventricle, and the THV should be advanced across the 
aortic valve and implanted with usual technique 
(Figure 4). In this case series, the time from leaflet 
traversal to valve implantation was approximately 
10 minutes, and the time from leaflet laceration 
(second balloon inflation) to THV implantation was 
approximately 2 minutes. Final coronary patency 
post–THV implant can be assessed with a nonselec-
tive aortogram. In this series, no patients had evi-
dence 
of 
left 
main 
obstruction 
after 
THV 
implantation.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
There are potential pitfalls of this technique that 
need to be mentioned. First, traversal of the leaflet 
requires familiarity with electrosurgical techniques 
including interpretation of the fluoroscopic and TEE 
cusp anatomy. As with BASILICA, traversal of the 
leaflet should be performed closer to the base of the
TABLE 2 Step-by-Step Modified UNICORN
1. Advance the guide in the aortic root and identify the target 
coronary cusp
2. Obtain angiogram of the cusp in the side view and frontal 
view of the target vessel (eg, left main or right coronary 
artery)
3. Advance the Astato wire within the microcatheter to the tip of 
the guide
4. Confirm the position of the point of traversal of the leaflet on 
TEE and ensure adequate catheter contact with the leaflet
5. Scratch the back of the Astato wire and connect with the 
electrosurgical pencil
6. Burn at 50 or 70 W while advancing the Astato wire
7. Advance the Astato wire in the left ventricle and remove the 
microcatheter
8. Advance the NC coronary balloon and perform valvotomy 
over the Astato wire at the point of traversal
9. After valvotomy, remove the balloon and exchange the 
Astato with a Supracore using a Quickcross or Navicross 
microcatheter
10. Advance a large (14 or 16 mm) noncompliant balloon across 
the leaflet
11. Exchange the Supracore with a Confida wire
12. Have the valve ready on the table
13. Inflate the large noncompliant balloon until maximum infla-
tion (disappearance of the waist indicates complete leaflet 
laceration)
14. Remove the Armada balloon and deploy the TAVR over the 
Confida wire
TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement; TEE = transesophageal echo-
cardiography; UNICORN = undermining iatrogenic coronary obstruction with 
radiofrequency needle.
TABLE 1 Modified UNICORN Equipment List
Vascular access
E-sheath (Edwards Lifesciences) for balloon-expandable S3 valve 
Gore DrySeal (Gore Medical) for self-expanding Evolut valve
Leaflet traversal
For left coronary cusp: AL3 7-F or 8-F guide catheter (if daughter-in-mother catheter is used, then 8-F guide catheter). 5-F 
125-cm catheter if daughter catheter is used
For right coronary cusp: JR4 and MP1 6-F guide catheter (if daughter-in-mother catheter is used, then 8-F guide catheter). 
5-F 125-cm catheter if daughter catheter is used
Astato XS 20 wire 300 cm (Asahi Intecc Medical), have multiple wires in the room
Finecross (Terumo Interventional Systems), Turnpike (Teleflex), or Piggyback (Teleflex) microcatheter
Copilot and 3-way stopcock
Electrosurgical pencil and generator
Leaflet laceration
For first valvotomy: 4.0 or 5.0 × 30 mm noncompliant coronary balloon
For final leaflet laceration: 14 or 16 mm noncompliant balloons
Quickcross (Philips) 0.035-inch microcatheter or Navicross (Terumo Interventional Systems) straight 0.035-inch microcatheter 
Confida (Medtronic) wire (or other preshaped wires)
UNICORN = undermining iatrogenic coronary obstruction with radiofrequency needle.
Giustino et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR With Modified UNICORN
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 4 3 1
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
FIGURE 3 Transesophageal Echocardiography Guidance for Traversal System Positioning and Leaflet Traversal
Multiplanar reconstruction imaging guidance during leaflet traversal. The dotted circle indicates the position of the catheter at the base of 
the left coronary cusp indicating appropriate positioning. The orange arrows indicate the AL3 guide catheter. Appropriate leaflet traversal 
can be confirmed by visualizing the wire in the left ventricular outflow tract.
FIGURE 2 Cusp Anatomy and Projections
Definition of cusp anatomy and fluoroscopic projections in the side view (A) and front view (B).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Giustino et al 
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 4 3 1
TAVR With Modified UNICORN
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
leaflet, as traversal closer to the tip may lead to 
ineffective leaflet laceration. In its original inception, 
UNICORN was performed with a 0.035-inch radio-
frequency wire. In this technique iteration, we 
believe that crossing with a 0.014-inch wire may be 
safer in case of traversal in a suboptimal spot. 
Second, this technique is ideal for patients with a 
single coronary artery at risk. If both coronary ar-
teries are at risk, it should be combined with 
BASILICA or snorkeling stenting for the contralateral 
artery. Third, following leaflet laceration with a large 
noncompliant balloon, the patient may become he-
modynamically unstable owing to severe aortic 
regurgitation. Sustained hemodynamic instability 
can be prevented by having the transcatheter heart 
valve readily available and minimizing the time of 
ventricular exposure to severe regurgitation. Fourth, 
severe commissural misalignment of the coronary 
ostia may impair the effectiveness of leaflet lacera-
tion to prevent CO. 1 Fifth, UNICORN has fewer data 
than BASILICA and may be associated with a more 
unpredictable pattern of leaflet laceration or even
leaflet avulsion. Finally, whereas in this series we 
used only balloon-expandable valves, a similar 
technique has also been recently described with self-
expanding valves. 9
CONCLUSIONS
Among patients at risk for CO undergoing TAVR, we 
describe the steps of a modified version of UNICORN 
that combines electrosurgical leaflet traversal with 
balloon-assisted leaflet laceration. This technique 
appeared to be effective and simplified part of the 
technical complexities associated with BASILICA. 
Further research is needed to evaluate its safety and 
its comparative effectiveness with BASILICA or 
snorkeling stenting.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Giustino has been a proctor and consultant for Edwards Life-
sciences. Dr Koulogiannis has been a consultant for Edwards Life-
sciences and Medtronic. Dr Genereux has received institutional 
research grants from Edwards Lifesciences; has received consulting
FIGURE 4 Modified UNICORN Leaflet Traversal, Balloon Laceration, and Valve Implantation
Steps for modified undermining iatrogenic coronary obstruction with radiofrequency needle (UNICORN) including traversal system positioning and leaflet traversal, 
first balloon inflation, second balloon inflation, and valve implantation. The orange arrows indicate the waist around the center of the balloon created by the 
surrounding leaflet tissue.
Giustino et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
TAVR With Modified UNICORN
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 4 3 1
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
fees from Abbott, Cordis, Edwards Lifesciences, Egnite, Haemo-
netics, Medtronic, Opsens, Puzzle Medical, Pi-Cardia, and 4C Medi-
cal; has reported equity in Puzzle Medical and Pi-Cardia; and has 
been a principal investigator of EARLY TAVR trial and PROGRESS 
trial, both sponsored by Edwards Lifesciences. All other authors have 
reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of 
this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Gennaro
Giustino, Valve and Structural Heart Center, Gagnon 
Cardiovascular Institute, Atlantic Health System, 100 
Madison Avenue, Morristown, New Jersey 07960, 
USA. E-mail: gennaro.giustino@atlantichealth.org.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Lederman RJ, Babaliaros VC, Rogers T, et al. 
Preventing coronary obstruction during trans-
catheter 
aortic 
valve 
replacement: 
from 
computed tomography to BASILICA. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2019;12:1197–1216.
2. Khan JM, Kamioka N, Lisko JC, et al. Coronary 
obstruction from TAVR in native aortic stenosis: 
development and validation of multivariate pre-
diction model. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2023;16: 
415–425.
3. Ibrahim H, Chaus A, Alkhalil A, Prescher L, 
Kleiman N. Coronary artery obstruction after 
transcatheter aortic valve implantation: past, 
present, and future. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 
2024;17:e012827.
4. Mercanti F, Rosseel L, Neylon A, et al. Chimney 
stenting for coronary occlusion during TAVR:
insights from the chimney registry. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2020;13:751–761.
5. Khan JM, Babaliaros VC, Greenbaum AB, et al. 
Preventing coronary obstruction during trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement: results from 
the multicenter international BASILICA registry. 
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2021;14:941–948.
6. Komatsu I, Mackensen GB, Aldea GS, Reisman M, 
Dvir D. Bioprosthetic or native aortic scallop inten-
tional laceration to prevent iatrogenic coronary ar-
tery obstruction. Part 2: how to perform BASILICA. 
EuroIntervention. 2019;15:55–66.
7. Mangieri A, Richter I, Gitto M, et al. Chimney 
stenting vs BASILICA for prevention of acute 
coronary obstruction during transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2024;17:742–752.
8. Chan KE, Tai-Leung Chan D, Lam CS, et al. 
First-in-human undermining iatrogenic coronary 
obstruction with radiofrequency Needle (UNI-
CORN) procedure during valve-in-valve trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement. Circ Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2022;15:928–931.
9. Haberman D, Lupu L, Merdler I, et al. UNICORN 
with a self-expanding valve to treat a degen-
erated balloon-expandable valve. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2025;18:123–125.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, percutaneous 
coronary intervention, valve replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Giustino et al 
J U L Y 3 0 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 4 3 1
TAVR With Modified UNICORN
7
