
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Use of a Bare Metal Dissection Stent to
Manage Aortic Embolization of a
Self-Expanding Valve
Matthew P. Huber, MD, MS,a Oscar L. Maitas, MD,a David M. Elison, MD,a Sara L. Zettervall, MD,b
Matthew P. Sweet, MD,b James M. McCabe, MD,a Scott C. DeRoo, MD,c Christine J. Chung, MDa
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND This paper describes a case of prosthesis embolization during transcatheter aortic valve replacement
(TAVR) that was managed with a novel percutaneous strategy.
CASE SUMMARY A 77-year-old man with severe trileaﬂet aortic valve stenosis underwent TAVR with a 29-mm Evolut
FX. The valve embolized to the ascending aorta shortly after its release. TAVR was completed with a 23-mm SAPIEN 3
Ultra RESILIA, and a Zenith Dissection Endovascular Stent was deployed through the embolized Evolut FX, pinning the
prosthesis to the aortic wall. The patient experienced no neurologic or aortic injury through 30 days of follow-up.
DISCUSSION Because of its use in complicated type B aortic dissection, the bare metal dissection stent is an excellent
option for managing embolized prostheses that cannot be repositioned in the descending aorta.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Deployment of a bare metal dissection stent may be an important rescue strategy for
embolized TAVR prostheses. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103128) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on
behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 77 year-old man with severe, symptomatic aortic
stenosis (maximum aortic jet velocity: 5.4 m/s, mean
transaortic pressure gradient: 65 mm Hg, valve area:
0.7
cm2)
was
referred
for
transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement
(TAVR).
Preprocedural
cardiac
computed tomography (CT) revealed a heavily calci-
ﬁed, trileaﬂet aortic valve with a small aortic annulus
(area: 408 mm2, perimeter: 73 mm); therefore, a self-
expanding valve was selected to optimize postim-
plant valve hemodynamics.1
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 An appropriately sized and well-positioned
self-expanding valve can embolize without
provocation in heavily calciﬁed aortic valves,
and deployment of a bare metal dissection
endovascular stent may be an important
rescue strategy.
 Although our case demonstrates that it is
both technically feasible and results in an
acceptable short-term outcome, the long-
term consequences are unknown.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103128
From the aDivision of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington,
USA; bDivision of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington,
USA; and the cDivision of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received October 18, 2024; revised manuscript received November 22, 2024, accepted December 3, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
Medical history was notable for obstructive
sleep apnea, hyperlipidemia, and type II
diabetes
mellitus.
Surgical
history
was
notable for prior cervical decompression with
posterior hardware placement that was complicated
by osteomyelitis, and the patient was maintained on
chronic, suppressive antibiotics.
MANAGEMENT
The patient was brought to the hybrid cardiac cathe-
terization laboratory and placed under monitored
anesthesia care. A temporary transvenous pacing wire
was inserted into the right ventricle (Table 1), and
aortic root angiography was performed to establish
the coplanar and cusp overlap views. Due to the se-
vere valvular calciﬁcation and high transvalvular
gradient, balloon aortic valvuloplasty was performed
with a 22-mm True Dilatation noncompliant balloon
(BD) under rapid ventricular pacing at 180 beats/min.
Incomplete
balloon
expansion
was
noted
during
maximal inﬂation due to bulky, nodular calciﬁcation
of the left coronary cusp. In the cusp overlap view
with parallax removed from the delivery system, a
29-mm Evolut FX (Medtronic) was deployed under
fast ventricular pacing at 120 beats/min at the desired
depth of 3 mm below the noncoronary cusp (Figure 1,
Video 1). Immediately after its release, before any
manipulation of the delivery system, the prosthesis
embolized to the ascending aorta.
The patient remained hemodynamically stable and
was
placed
under
general
anesthesia.
A
trans-
esophageal echocardiogram probe was inserted and
demonstrated no evidence of aortic injury or peri-
cardial effusion. An emergent multidisciplinary con-
ference
was
convened
among
interventional
cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, and vascular sur-
gery to discuss strategies to complete treatment of
the aortic stenosis and stabilize the embolized pros-
thesis. Because there had been no interaction with
the valve before its embolization, the mechanism was
presumed to be insufﬁcient radial force of the pros-
thesis to anchor against the heavily calciﬁed left
coronary cusp. Thus, a balloon-expandable valve was
chosen to complete the TAVR. Conﬁda wire position
was maintained through the embolized valve, and the
Medtronic delivery system was exchanged for an
Edwards eSheath. A 23-mm SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA
(Edwards Lifesciences) was then advanced through
the embolized Evolut FX and successfully deployed
in standard fashion.
Attention was then directed to the embolized
Evolut FX. Because of its spontaneous rocking and
proximity to the arch vessels, the multidisciplinary
team concluded that the valve could not be safely left
in the ascending aorta without ﬁxing its position. In
addition, the signiﬁcant tapering of the descending
thoracic aorta (proximal ascending aorta: 34.8 
34.9 mm; descending thoracic aorta: 28.6  29.6 mm)
precluded attempts at snaring and repositioning the
valve in the descending aorta. Consequently, a 46- 
185-mm Zenith Dissection Endovascular Stent (Cook
Medical), a bare metal stent approved for the treat-
ment of acute type B aortic dissection, was selected to
stabilize the embolized prosthesis in the aortic arch
and minimize motion that could result in dissection.
After the Conﬁda wire was exchanged for a double-
curve Lunderquist wire (Cook Medical), the stent
was advanced through the prosthesis and deployed
with its proximal inﬂow at the sinotubular junction
and its distal portion at zone 4 of the aorta. Fluoros-
copy demonstrated the Evolut valve securely pinned
in the ascending aorta, with the inﬂow abutting the
greater curvature of the ascending aorta and its distal
crown at the innominate artery. Completion angio-
gram revealed excellent blood ﬂow to the arch ves-
sels, and transesophageal echocardiogram did not
demonstrate evidence of dissection.
TABLE 1
Equipment List for Procedure
Access

Micropuncture kit (Cook Medical)

6-F PINNACLE Introducer Sheath, 10 cm (Terumo Interventional Systems)

8-F PINNACLE Introducer Sheath, 10 cm (Terumo Interventional Systems)

14-F Check-Flo Sheath, 30 cm (Cook Medical)

14-F eSheath Plus (Edwards)

Perclose Prostyle Device Closure (Abbott Cardiovascular)
Coronary Angiogram and Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement

0.035-inch Fixed Core Guidewire, Exchange Straight, 180 cm (Cook Medical)

0.035-inch Conﬁda Guidewire, 260 cm (Medtronic)

0.035-inch Amplatz Guidewire, 260 cm, 3 mm J (Boston Scientiﬁc)

0.035-inch Glidewire Advantage Guidewire, 180 cm (Terumo Interventional
Systems)

0.035” Glidewire Advantage Guidewire, 260 cm (Terumo Interventional
Systems)

6-F Launcher JR4 Guide Catheter, 100 cm (Medtronic)

6-F EXPO FL4 Catheter, 100 cm (Boston Scientiﬁc)

6-F EXPO AL1 Catheter, 100 cm (Boston Scientiﬁc)

6-F IMPULSE Fr4 Diagnostic Catheter, 100 cm (Boston Scientiﬁc)

5-F OPTITORQUE Angled Pigtail Catheter 155, 110 cm (Terumo
Interventional Systems)

5-F Accu-Vu Angiographic Sizing Catheter – Omni Flush – 2 cm Marker,
0.035-inch  70 cm (AngioDynamics, Inc)

5-F Temporary Pacing Electrode Catheter – Balloon Bipolar – Right Heart
Curve, 110 cm (C.R. Bard, Inc)

22 mm True Dilation Balloon, 110 cm (BD)

29 mm Evolut FXþ (Medtronic)

23 mm SAPIEN Ultra RESILIA 23 mm Heart Valve Kit (Edwards)

23 mm Commander Delivery System (Edwards)

23 mm Lifesciences SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA Valve (Edwards)

Switchback QL 25 mL 3-way Stopcock Inﬂation Device (B. Braun Medical)
Bare-Metal Dissection Stent

0.035-inch Double-Curved Lunderquist Extra-Stiff Wire Guide (Cook Medical)

46-  185-mm Zenith Dissection Endovascular Stent (Cook Medical)
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Huber et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Bare Metal Dissection Stent for Self-Expanding Valve Embolization
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 8
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient awoke neurologically intact, and imme-
diate postprocedural CT angiogram conﬁrmed the
absence of aortic injury or dissection. The patient was
monitored in the intensive care unit for impulse
control and was discharged the following day on
aspirin 81 mg daily. Repeat CT angiogram at 30 days
did not demonstrate aortic injury or aneurysm.
DISCUSSION
Although the risk of transcatheter valve embolization
ranged from 0.3% to 1.1% in the early TAVR experi-
ence,2,3 contemporary incidence, using current gen-
eration valves and the transfemoral approach, is
estimated
at
0.6%.1
This
complication
most
commonly occurs immediately after valve deploy-
ment, and the prosthesis appears to embolize more
frequently to the aorta than to the left ventricle.4
Transcatheter valve embolization can be a devas-
tating complication that is associated with high risk of
subsequent mechanical circulatory support, conver-
sion to open heart surgery, stroke, and mortality5;
therefore, an in-depth understanding of the causes of
this complication is essential for prevention and
effective management. Mechanisms can be grouped
into: 1) anatomic factors (bulky leaﬂet calciﬁcation,
paucity of annular calciﬁcation, horizontal annulus);
2)
procedural
factors
(malpositioning,
prosthesis
undersizing, pacing failure, post-dilatation, stored
wire tension); and 3) device-related factors (failure of
detachment, faulty loading).6 Our case demonstrates
that an appropriately sized and well-positioned self-
expanding valve can embolize without provocation,
especially in heavily calciﬁed anatomies, and the
mechanism is presumably due to the lower radial
force of the self-expanding valve. One warning sign
may be the persistence of a waist during balloon
aortic valvuloplasty.
The management of transcatheter valve emboliza-
tion presents a challenge for the operator and varies
by the type and location of the embolized prosthesis
and the hemodynamic state of the patient. Valve
FIGURE 1
Fluoroscopic and Computed Tomography Imaging During the Case
(A) Fluoroscopic image of the 29-mm Evolut FX deployment (Medtronic). (B) Fluoroscopic image of the embolized Evolut FX in the ascending aorta. (C) Fluoroscopic
image of the deployed 46-  185-mm Zenith Dissection Endovascular Stent (Cook Medical) anchoring the embolized Evolut FX in the ascending aorta. (D) Pre-
procedural cardiac computed tomography (CT) demonstrating the heavily calciﬁed native aortic valve. (E) CT imaging immediately postprocedure. (F) CT imaging
30 days after the procedure. Images reproduced with the patient’s verbal informed consent.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Huber et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 8
Bare Metal Dissection Stent for Self-Expanding Valve Embolization
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
embolization into the left ventricular outﬂow tract or
left ventricle can infrequently be managed by device
retrieval and/or implanting a second transcatheter
valve that addresses the preexisting aortic valve dis-
ease and secures the embolized prosthesis in a suit-
able subannular position. However, this complication
often requires conversion to open surgery to retrieve
the device and replace the aortic valve. In contrast,
transcatheter valve embolization to the aorta can be
more successfully managed with percutaneous stra-
tegies. In the hemodynamically stable patient, it is
paramount to ﬁrst maintain wire position to prevent
ﬂow obstruction from an inverted valve. The embol-
ized valve can then undergo post-dilatation to anchor
it in the ascending aorta, or the valve can be reposi-
tioned with a snare and redeployed in the descending
thoracic/abdominal aorta in an area free of major
branches. These rescue strategies are generally more
efﬁcacious
for
the
embolized
balloon-expandable
valve because the taller frame and larger outﬂow
diameter of the self-expanding valve complicate de-
vice repositioning, which can result in aortic injury.7
Use of the Zenith Dissection Endovascular Stent is
an intriguing percutaneous rescue strategy for the
embolized prosthesis that cannot be safely post-
dilated or repositioned to another location within
the aorta. A component of the Zenith Dissection
Endovascular System, this endovascular stent was
originally devised for patients presenting with acute
type B aortic dissection complicated by organ mal-
perfusion, and the stent promotes the expansion of
the true aortic lumen distal to the primary entry tear
while facilitating spinal and visceral perfusion via its
noncovered design of self-expanding nitinol Cook-Z
segments (Cook Medical) sewn together with poly-
ester.8 In addition, the small diameter wires of the
stent segments exert low radial force and may lessen
the risk of added injury to the delaminated aorta.9 To
our knowledge, in a previous issue of JACC: Case
Reports, Keeton et al10 reported the ﬁrst-ever use of a
Zenith Dissection Endovascular Stent to tack an
embolized Evolut valve against the walls of the
proximal aortic arch during a valve-in-valve TAVR,
and our case further extends this rescue strategy to
patients undergoing native valve TAVR with the
Evolut valve. As demonstrated in both case reports,
the
low
radial
force
of
the
stent
stabilizes
the
prothesis while minimizing its interaction with the
aortic wall, presumably lessening the risk of iatro-
genic dissection. In addition, the noncovered, large
cell design of the stent also permits adequate blood
ﬂow to the arch vessels after the device had been
delivered. An important technical consideration of
stent deployment is the long, rigid nose cone of the
Cook
introducer
sheath, which
may
need
to
be
modiﬁed to facilitate device delivery through the
embolized prosthesis in the aortic arch. Furthermore,
although our case report suggests that this rescue
strategy results in an acceptable short-term outcome,
the
long-term
consequences
are
unknown,
and
overstenting
an
embolized
Evolut
valve
may
be
associated with higher risk of subsequent aortic
injury, stroke, and clinically important stenosis at the
waist of the embolized valve.
CONCLUSIONS
A 77-year-old man with severe, symptomatic aortic
stenosis from a heavily calciﬁed, trileaﬂet valve un-
derwent TAVR with an Evolut FX. Shortly after its
release, the valve spontaneously embolized to the
proximal ascending aorta. The TAVR was completed
with a SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA, and a Zenith Dissec-
tion Endovascular Stent was deployed through the
embolized Evolut FX, securely pinning the prosthesis
to the aortic wall without causing aortic injury or ﬂow
obstruction to the branch vessels. The patient expe-
rienced no neurologic or aortic injury through 30 days
of follow-up.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Elison has equity in Excision Medical. Dr Zettervall has consulted
for Cook Medical, Gore Medical, and Terumo Aortic. Dr McCabe has
consulted for Edwards Lifesciences, Medtronic, Abbott, Shockwave
Medical, and Gore Medical and is on the advisory boards of Excision
Medical, ConKay Medical, and Sparrow and Arcos. Dr Chung has
received consulting fees/honoraria from Boston Scientiﬁc, Edwards
Lifesciences, and Medtronic. All other authors have reported that
they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to
disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Matthew P.
Huber, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Division of Cardiology, 1959 NE Paciﬁc Street, HSB
BB552, Box 356422, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
E-mail: mahuber@uw.edu.
Huber et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Bare Metal Dissection Stent for Self-Expanding Valve Embolization
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 8
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Herrmann HC, Mehran R, Blackman DJ, et al.
Self-expanding or balloon-expandable TAVR in
patients with a small aortic annulus. N Engl J Med.
2024;390(21):1959–1971.
2. Walther T, Hamm CW, Schuler G, et al. Periop-
erative results and complications in 15,964 trans-
catheter aortic valve replacements: prospective
data from the GARY registry. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2015;65(20):2173–2180.
3. Chieffo A, Petronio AS, Mehilli J, et al. Acute
and 30-day outcomes in women after TAVR: re-
sults from the WIN-TAVI (Women’s INternational
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation) real-
world
registry.
JACC
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2016;9(15):1589–1600.
4. Kim WK, Schafer U, Tchetche D, et al. Incidence
and outcome of peri-procedural transcatheter
heart
valve
embolization
and
migration:
the
TRAVEL
registry
(TranscatheteR
HeArt
Valve
EmboLization
and
Migration).
Eur
Heart
J.
2019;40(38):3156–3165.
5. Makkar RR, Jilaihawi H, Chakravarty T, et al.
Determinants
and
outcomes
of
acute
trans-
catheter valve-in-valve therapy or embolization: a
study of multiple valve implants in the U.S.
PARTNER
trial
(Placement
of
AoRTic
TraNs-
cathetER Valve Trial
Edwards SAPIEN Trans-
catheter
Heart
Valve).
J
Am
Coll
Cardiol.
2013;62(5):418–430.
6. Alkhouli M, Sievert H, Rihal CS. Device embo-
lization in structural heart interventions: inci-
dence, outcomes, and retrieval techniques. JACC
Cardiovasc Interv. 2019;12(2):113–126.
7. Santangelo G, Silvestro A, Medda M, et al. Type
A aortic dissection after transcatheter aortic valve
replacement:
is
a
surgical
approach
always
needed?
J
Cardiovasc
Med
(Hagerstown).
2021;22(12):e29–e31.
8. Spanos K, Kolbel T. Device proﬁle of the Zenith
Dissection
Endovascular
System
for
aortic
dissection. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2019;16(7):
541–548.
9. Cook Medical. Zenith Dissection Endovascular
Stent.
https://www.cookmedical.com/products/
8e6006da-f9f8-4bb7-997e-4bbb1f26cefc/#
10. Keeton JZ, Prasad A, Bacharach T, Dayama A,
Sako E, Almomani A. Innovative approach to
manage transcatheter aortic valve embolization.
JACC Case Rep. 2023;7:101598.
KEY WORDS aorta, aortic valve,
complication, stents
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Huber et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 8
Bare Metal Dissection Stent for Self-Expanding Valve Embolization
5
