
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
HOW WE DID IT
Type 0 Severe Calciﬁed Bicuspid Aortic
Valve With Aneurysmal Repaired
With TaurusElite
Zuofeng Qin, MD,a,* Wenyi Wu, MD,a,* Sanwu Wu, MD,a Dong Li, MD,a,b Youen Zhang, MDa,b
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVE This case report presents the successful application of transcatheter aortic valve replacement using the
TaurusElite valve in a high-risk patient with severe calciﬁed type 0 bicuspid aortic valve and aneurysmal dilation of the
ascending aorta. The report highlights using a snare-assisted technique to navigate complex anatomical challenges.
KEY STEPS Preoperative multimodal imaging for precise anatomical assessment. A snare-assisted delivery system
navigation ensures controlled passage through the aortic arch and valve. Balloon predilation and careful valve
deployment at 2 mm above the annulus. Postdeployment conﬁrmation of valve position and coronary perfusion.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS Risk of paravalvular leak due to severe calciﬁcation and asymmetric valve anatomy. Potential
for coronary obstruction or aortic injury during valve deployment. Challenges in navigating a narrow aortic arch and
aneurysmal dilation.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE TAVR with adjunctive techniques like snare-assisted navigation is a viable option for high-risk
patients with complex BAV anatomy, emphasizing the importance of meticulous preoperative planning and precise valve
positioning to minimize complications. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:104020) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on
behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
A
ortic stenosis (AS) is one of the most common
valvular heart diseases, exhibiting an up-
trending incidence with advancing age.1 AS
is mainly caused by calciﬁcation, bicuspid aortic
valve (BAV), and rheumatic disease. BAV, a common
congenital heart defect (1%-2% prevalence), is classi-
ﬁed into types 0 (7%), 1 (88%), and 2 (5%) by the
Sievers system.2,3 China has a higher BAV prevalence,
especially type 0, among transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
(TAVR)
patients
compared
with
the
West, with the most severe aortic regurgitation,
largest aortic dimensions, and poorest prognosis in
Asia.4 In the clinic, AS patients can present with
symptoms such as angina, syncope, and heart failure.
Since the ﬁrst successful TAVR in 2002, TAVR has
emerged as a critical treatment option for symptom-
atic AS patients who have a high surgical risk or con-
traindications to the traditional surgical approach.
TAVR has the advantages of safety and minimal inva-
siveness, with a high success rate.5 In this study, we
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104020
From the aDepartment of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, China; and the bArteriosclerosis
Cardiovascular Disease Clinical Medical Research Center of Hubei Province, Shiyan, China. *These authors contributed equally to
this work.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received February 27, 2025; revised manuscript received April 2, 2025, accepted April 7, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
present a case of a 60-year-old female patient
with type 0 severe calciﬁed BAV accompa-
nied by aneurysmal dilation of the ascending
aorta. We described this patient’s treatment
strategy and outcomes to provide a reference
for the clinical management of patients with
similar illnesses.
CASE SUMMARY
A 60-year-old woman presented with recurrent chest
tightness and shortness of breath for over a year. Her
medical history included coronary atherosclerosis
and
hypertension.
An
outpatient
echocardiogram
showed moderate AS and regurgitation, ascending
aortic dilation, left heart hypertrophy, and left ven-
tricular wall thickening. She was hemodynamically
stable on admission, with normal breath sounds and a
grade 3/6 systolic murmur at the right sternal border.
No peripheral edema or jugular vein distention was
observed.
The laboratory tests were normal, including com-
plete blood cell counts, coagulation function, liver
function, renal function, electrolytes, and N-terminal
pro–B-type natriuretic peptide level. The electrocar-
diogram reported regular sinus rhythm, premature
atrial beats, and ST-T abnormalities. The echocar-
diographic examination demonstrated an aortic valve
annulus diameter of 19 mm, aortic sinus inner diam-
eter of 37 mm, aneurysmal dilation of the proximal
ascending aorta of 53 mm, enhanced echogenicity in
aortic valve with restricted motion, accelerated aortic
valve systolic blood ﬂow, peak ﬂow velocity of 5.9 m/
s, pressure gradient of 139 mm Hg, a moderate
amount of blood ﬂow reﬂux signal during diastolic
aortic regurgitation with a peak ﬂow velocity of
4.3 m/s and pressure gradient of 76 mm Hg, left atrial
anteroposterior diameter of 41 mm, left ventricular
anteroposterior diameter of 51 mm, left ventricular
ejection fracture of 56%, and fractional shortening of
30%. The computed tomography angiography showed
a shallow myocardial bridge in the anterior descend-
ing branch, left ventricular wall thickening (diastolic
septum thickness w18 mm), aortic valve calciﬁca-
tions,
widened
ascending
aorta
(w56
mm),
and
aneurysmal
dilation
at
the
left
common
carotid
artery’s origin. The heart was enlarged, with a calci-
ﬁed plaque in the abdominal aortic wall. Preoperative
assessments included computed tomography evalu-
ation, aortic root and supravalvular measurement
(BAV
with
annulus
diameter
of
22.1
mm
and
ascending aorta dilation, valve leaﬂet thickening with
severe
calciﬁcations
and
a
score
of
1,060
mm3)
(Figure 1), coronary obstruction risk, and peripheral
vascular access. The patient was scheduled for TAVR
surgery.
PROCEDURAL STEPS
PREOPERATIVE
PREPARATION
AND
VASCULAR
ACCESS. The procedure was performed under gen-
eral anesthesia with transthoracic echocardiographic
guidance. The patient was placed in a supine position
under general anesthesia. The surgical ﬁeld was dis-
infected. A temporary pacemaker was placed through
the left subclavian vein. Vascular access was obtained
via a 6-F vascular sheath through the right brachial
artery, and a pigtail angiography catheter was intro-
duced into the ascending aorta for imaging. Then, the
right femoral artery was punctured and ﬁtted with a
7-F vascular sheath; a 6-F EBU3.5 guiding catheter
was advanced along the guidewire to the left coro-
nary ostium. Ultimately, the left femoral artery was
accessed, and after the placement of 2 ProGlide
vascular suture devices (Abbott), an 8-F arterial
sheath was inserted.
BALLOON
PREDILATION. Aortic
root
angiography
revealed a limited opening of the aortic valve. An 18-
mm balloon was used twice for predilation to facili-
tate the passage, producing a slight “waist sign” with
no contrast agent leak and ensuring that left coronary
artery perfusion remained normal (Figures 2A and 2B).
The
coronary
artery
protection
guidewire
was
withdrawn.
SNARE-ASSISTED
VALVE
DELIVERY
TECHNIQUE.
The snare-assisted method improves delivery system
control,
ensuring
precise
positioning
even
with
complex aortic root anatomy. Given the patient’s type
0 BAV, characterized by the absence of a raphe, with
severe calciﬁcation (score: 1,060 mm3) and aortic
dilation, a snare-assisted technique was employed to
control the delivery system’s passage. The Amplatz
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 TAVR is a viable option for high-risk patients
with severe calciﬁed type 0 BAV and an
ascending aortic aneurysm, mainly when
adjunctive techniques like snare-assisted
navigation are utilized to overcome complex
anatomical challenges.
 Comprehensive preprocedural imaging, pre-
cise valve selection, and optimal implanta-
tion depth are essential to reducing
complications such as paravalvular leak and
coronary obstruction, highlighting the need
for patient-speciﬁc strategies in complex
BAV cases.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AS = aortic stenosis
BAV = bicuspid aortic valve
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Qin et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 5
Type 0 Severe Calciﬁed BAV With Aneurysmal Repaired With TaurusElite
M A Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 0 2 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
GooseNeck
Snare
(15-25
mm;
Medtronic)
was
selected, with a transfemoral approach for valve de-
livery and a transradial/brachial approach for snare
guidance. The primary approach advanced a super-
rigid guidewire (eg, Conﬁda [Medtronic]) into the
left ventricle. At the same time, the snare, introduced
via the accessory route, captured the distal end of the
guidewire, forming a “U-ring.” The snare was then
gradually tightened to retract the guidewire toward
the aortic arch or descending aorta, shortening its
FIGURE 1
Aortic Root and Supravalvular Structure Measurement
A longitudinal clefted bicuspid aortic valve, annular diameter of 22.1 mm, left ventricular outﬂow tract, and aneurysmal dilation of the ascending aorta of 56 mm.
Thickened valve leaﬂets with severe calciﬁcations were mainly distributed on one side of the valve leaﬂets and the commissure of the two sinuses. The calciﬁcation
score was 1,060 mm3.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 5
Qin et al
M A Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 0 2 0
Type 0 Severe Calciﬁed BAV With Aneurysmal Repaired With TaurusElite
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
effective length, enhancing support, and optimizing
axial alignment. With continuous snare traction syn-
chronized with the advancement of the delivery sys-
tem, the system was successfully guided across the
aortic valve. After conﬁrming the proper position and
deployment of the valve, the snare was released and
withdrawn, ensuring the integrity of the guidewire
and the absence of vascular injury.
VALVE DEPLOYMENT AND INTRAOPERATIVE ADJUSTMENTS.
The AV23 valve was released at 0 mm above the valve
annulus. After conﬁrmation of the deep positioning of
the
valve,
the
delivery
system
was
retracted
(Figures 2C and 2D). A second attempt was performed
with the AV23 valve released at 2 mm above the
annulus. The valve morphology and position were
satisfactory in the working position, with normal
coronary artery blood perfusion. Repeat angiography
conﬁrmed no abnormality (Figures 2E and 2F), and
postoperative
transthoracic
echocardiography
demonstrated no paravalvular leak around the aortic
valve, with a pressure gradient of 9.04 mm Hg.
BAILOUT
TECHNIQUES
FOR
INTRAOPERATIVE
CHALLENGES. In cases in which the snare-assisted
technique was not used upfront or when intra-
operative difﬁculties arise—such as failure to advance
the delivery system, guidewire instability, or valve
displacement—several
bailout
techniques
may
be
employed. These include adjusting the guidewire to
optimize
coaxial
alignment,
utilizing
emergency
snare remediation for realignment and stabilization,
applying the buddy wire technique to enhance sup-
port, or adopting a retrograde crossing approach by
advancing a secondary wire from an alternate access
site. These techniques serve as rescue strategies to
FIGURE 2
Implantation of Artiﬁcial Aortic Valve
(A) Aortic root angiography, limited aortic patency, and 2 full predilations with an 18-mm balloon. (B) Mild “waist sign,” no contrast leak. (C, D) With the snare
assistance, the TaurusElite delivery system successfully passed through the aortic arch and valve. The AV23 valve was released at 0 mm above the valve annulus,
resulting in deep positioning of the valve. Therefore, the artiﬁcial valve was retrieved. (E, F) The AV23 valve was released at 2 mm above the valve annulus during the
second attempt. The valve morphology and position were satisfactory at its working position. The coronary blood perfusion was normal. There was no paravalvular
leak after the valve was anchored to the annulus. No abnormality was identiﬁed in the aortic arch angiography.
Qin et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 5
Type 0 Severe Calciﬁed BAV With Aneurysmal Repaired With TaurusElite
M A Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 0 2 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
prevent procedural failure and mitigate complica-
tions
when
encountering
challenging
anatomical
constraints.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR VALVE SELECTION. In TAVR
for type 0 BAV, valve selection critically depends on
root anatomy and calciﬁcation distribution. Balloon-
expandable valves offer superior radial support to
reduce the risk of paravalvular leakage, particularly
in cases with severe asymmetric calciﬁcation and a
small root angle. Although precise implantation is
required, balloon-expandable valves ensure better
sealing and controlled deployment, making them
preferable for this case to optimize valve anchoring
and minimize complications. In our case, there was
no
paravalvular
leak
after
the
valve
had
been
anchored to the annulus.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
The preoperative evaluation indicated moderate dif-
ﬁculty anchoring the valve due to severe calciﬁcation,
which increased the risk of paravalvular leak. The
artiﬁcial valve’s placement required careful adjust-
ment to prevent deformation and root damage. The
left valve leaﬂet extended beyond the coronary ostia
attachment edge, increasing the risk of left coronary
artery obstruction. Given the dimensions of the sinus
of Valsalva, intraoperative balloon dilation was per-
formed
with
attention
to
maintaining
coronary
perfusion.
The patient’s 61 annular angle, narrow aortic arch,
and ascending aortic aneurysm (56 mm) posed chal-
lenges in crossing the valve and arch, elevating the
risk
of
dissection
and
rupture.
Compared
with
tricuspid
aortic
valves,
BAV
patients
have
more
complex anatomy and a higher risk of complications
post-TAVR. Studies indicate that BAV-AS patients
undergoing TAVR face increased paravalvular leaks,
particularly with self-expanding valves. In contrast,
balloon-expandable valves, though providing better
sealing,
may
heighten
the
risk
of
aortic
injury.
A thorough anatomical assessment is essential for
device selection and procedural planning to mitigate
these risks.5
CONCLUSIONS
This case highlights the successful application of
TAVR in a high-risk patient with severe calciﬁed type
0 BAV and aneurysmal dilation of the ascending
aorta.
A
snare-assisted
technique
facilitated
safe
navigation through a complex aortic arch, while the
balloon-expandable TaurusElite valve (Peijia Medi-
cal) provided controlled deployment and optimal
annular sealing. Key lessons include the importance
of multimodal imaging for preoperative planning, the
utility of adjunctive techniques in challenging anat-
omies, and the need for careful valve positioning to
ensure coronary perfusion. As TAVR continues to
evolve, this case underscores its potential as a viable
alternative to surgery in patients with complex BAV
anatomy, provided that procedural strategies are
tailored to individual anatomical challenges. How-
ever, a balloon-expandable valve was not used in our
case due to cost concern. Further research is war-
ranted to reﬁne techniques and improve outcomes in
this high-risk population.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Youen Zhang,
Institute of Clinical Medicine and Department of
Cardiology, Renmin Hospital, Hubei University of
Medicine, Shiyan, Hubei, 442000, China. E-mail:
zye112@hotmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Garcia S, Ye J, Webb J, et al. Transcatheter
treatment of native aortic valve regurgitation:
the North American experience with a novel de-
vice. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2023;16(16):1953–
1960.
2. Eleid MF, Nkomo VT, Pislaru SV, Gersh BJ.
Valvular heart disease: new concepts in patho-
physiology and therapeutic approaches. Annu Rev
Med. 2023;74:155–170.
3. Dayawansa N, Noaman S, Teng LE, Htun NM.
Transcatheter aortic valve therapy for bicuspid
aortic
valve
stenosis.
J
Cardiovasc
Dev
Dis.
2023;10(10):421.
4. Chew NWS, Phua K, Ngiam JN, et al. Inter-
ethnic differences in valvular dysfunction, aort-
opathy, and progression of disease of an Asian
bicuspid aortic valve population. Heart Lung Circ.
2022;31(4):469–479.
5. Fan J, Li Z, Lin D, et al. Long-term outcomes in
patients with bicuspid valve stenosis and aortic
dilation undergoing transcatheter valve implan-
tation. Int J Cardiol. 2024;409:132201.
KEY WORDS aortic aneurysm, aortic
stenosis, bicuspid aortic valve, snare-
assisted technique, transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 5
Qin et al
M A Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 0 2 0
Type 0 Severe Calciﬁed BAV With Aneurysmal Repaired With TaurusElite
5
