
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
HOW WE DID IT
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
Jonathan X. Fang, MBBS,a,b Pedro A. Villablanca, MD, MSCa
ABSTRACT
OBJECT Bioprosthetic or native Aortic Scallop Intentional Laceration to prevent Iatrogenic Coronary Artery obstruction
(BASILICA) is currently the standard technique for leaﬂet modiﬁcation in transcatheter aortic valve replacement to
overcome coronary obstruction. The technique involves traversal of the coronary cusp with a 0.014-inch coronary wire,
snaring the wire, and then lacerating the leaﬂet with a denuded portion of the wire known as the ﬂying V. The procedure
requires careful planning and technical expertise. We report a new complication of BASILICA where prepositioning of a
transcatheter heart valve (THV) before laceration accidentally damaged the THV.
KEY STEPS This complication originates from the inadvertent crossing of the straight-tip wire between the ﬂying V and
the aortic cusp when the ﬂying V was not well apposed to the cusp. Prepositioning of the THV has become a variation of
the procedure for patients with a high perceived risk of hemodynamic instability after BASILICA. This backﬁred, resulting
in a complicated procedure.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS The exact position of the 0.014-inch wire and ﬂying V might be difﬁcult to visualize in patients
with a large body habitus. Operators should check that the ﬂying V is at the cusp level before crossing the aortic valve
with a wire. During the initial delivery of the ﬂying V to the cusp, care should be taken to avoid losing the wire in the
guide. Multicenter data of BASILICA show that hemodynamic instability is uncommon in single-leaﬂet lacerations.
Therefore, prepositioning of a THV before leaﬂet laceration is usually unnecessary and requires strong clinical justiﬁcation
if pursued
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES BASILICA is a complex procedure. Operator familiarity with potential pitfalls and appropriate
bailout methods are necessary. Operators should ensure that the ﬂying V is well apposed to the leaﬂet before
crossing into the left ventricle with a wire to prepare for valve deployment. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103912)
© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an
open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
T
he Bioprosthetic or native Aortic Scallop
Intentional Laceration to prevent Iatrogenic
Coronary Artery obstruction (BASILICA) dur-
ing the transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
procedure1 is currently the standard technique for
leaﬂet modiﬁcation during TAVR to prevent coronary
artery obstruction. The procedure involves traversal
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE
 Operators should ensure that the ﬂying V is
well apposed to the leaﬂet before crossing
into the left ventricle with a wire to prepare
for valve deployment.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103912
From the aCenter for Structural Heart Disease, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, USA; and the bNational Heart Centre
Singapore, Singapore.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received October 17, 2024; revised manuscript received December 5, 2024, accepted December 17, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
of the coronary cusp with a coronary wire un-
der electrosurgery cut, followed by snaring of
the wire and then laceration of the leaﬂet
with a denuded and kinked portion of the
coronary wire, known as the ﬂying V, under
electrosurgery cut. The ﬂying V is delivered
to the coronary cusp by feeding the wire
through 1 guide and pulling the snared wire
through
another
guide.
Potential
pitfalls
include traversal failure, persistent coronary
obstruction when the traversal is not basal
enough or the anatomy is unfavorable for BASILICA,
or inadvertent damage to surrounding structures.
Anatomical factors favoring BASILICA include a pros-
thetic valve leaﬂet that extends above the coronary
ostia in systole and a short valve-to-coronary distance
of <4 mm in valves with reasonable commissural
alignment and a low coronary height of 10 mm in pa-
tients with native valves. Additional considerations
include sinus width <30 mm and a short valve frame
to sinotubular junction distance of <3 mm. Clinical
factors favoring BASILICA over coronary protection
VISUAL SUMMARY
The Snowball Effect of Complications
THV ¼ transcatheter aortic valve; other abbreviation as in Figure 2.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
BASILICA = Bioprosthetic or
native Aortic Scallop
Intentional Laceration to
prevent Iatrogenic Coronary
Artery obstruction
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
Fang and Villablanca
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
and chimney stenting include long life expectancy
and anticipation of coronary revascularization in the
future.
CASE SUMMARY
A 71-year-old woman presented with symptomatic
aortic
stenosis.
She
had
a
body
mass
index
of
43 kg/m2, multivessel non-bstructive coronary artery
disease up to 60%, and stage 3b chronic kidney dis-
ease with an estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate of
35 mL/min/1.73 m2. Her Society of Cardiothoracic
Surgeons Predicted Risk of Operative Mortality was
5.0%, and surgical evaluation concluded that she had a
very high surgical risk. Echocardiography revealed an
aortic valve area of 0.81 cm2, peak velocity of 3.75 m/s,
gradient of 56.1/27.7 mm Hg, and stroke volume index
of 29.91 mL/m2 with mild regurgitation. Her femoral
arteries were favorable for access. She had an aortic
annulus area of 390 mm2, a low coronary height of
10.8 mm for the left main coronary artery, a distance to
the opposing wall of 21.7 mm, estimating valve-to
coronary distance of 2.7 mm, sinus width of 24.4 mm,
and a low and narrow sinotubular junction (Figure 1).
Transfemoral
access
was
feasible.
A
heart
team
meeting opted for TAVR with a balloon-expandable
23-mm valve using a left femoral access with leaﬂet
modiﬁcation using BASILICA because of the risk of
FIGURE 1
Access and Computed Tomography Workup
(A) Adequate femoral access. (B to D) Annulus, sinotubular junction, and left coronary height. LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow ract.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Fang and Villablanca
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
coronary obstruction and anticipation of future need
of percutaneous coronary intervention (Figure 2).
We performed BASILICA with leaﬂet traversal in
the standard manner. However, during the delivery
of the ﬂying V, the snared wire was lost in a 45-cm-
long sheath in the abdominal aorta, requiring removal
by balloon trapping against the sheath followed by
en-bloc removal of the sheath and reinsertion. Sub-
sequently, we crossed the valve with a straight-tip
wire from the primary access, placed a pigtail cath-
eter, exchanged it for a circular-tip wire, and pre-
pared
a
23-mm
balloon-expandable
transcatheter
heart valve (THV). We prepositioned the THV just
above the annular level before lacerating the left cusp
to shorten the time between laceration and valve
deployment. However, subsequent leaﬂet laceration
accidentally snared the THV (Video 1) because of
inadvertent wire crossing between the aortic cusp
and the ﬂying V as the ﬂying V was not well apposed
to the cusp. Regardless, transesophageal echocardi-
ography conﬁrmed laceration of the left cusp and no
evidence of damage to intracardiac structures. We
therefore proceeded to reposition the THV across the
annulus for deployment. However, the balloon of the
THV was found to be lacerated and could not be
inﬂated to deploy the THV (Figure 3). We pulled the
valve back and deployed it in descending aorta and
took a new 23-mm balloon-expandable valve for
TAVR and deployed it while paying attention to the
low sinotubular junction height, with a good result
(Figure 4). A cerebral embolic protection device was
used. During this process from leaﬂet laceration to
deployment of a second valve, the patient remained
hemodynamically stable.
FIGURE 2
Heart Team Plan and BASILICA Angles
Two 45-cm 6-F sheaths were used for BASILICA. Embolic protection was used from radial access. BASILICA ¼ Bioprosthetic or native Aortic
Scallop Intentional Laceration to prevent Iatrogenic Coronary Artery obstruction; BMI ¼ body mass index; CFA ¼ common femoral artery;
LAO ¼ left anterior oblique; LCA ¼ left coronary artery; LFA ¼ left common femoral artery; LRA ¼ left radial artery; RAO ¼ right anterior
oblique; RRA ¼ right radial artery; SFA ¼ superﬁcial femoral artery; TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
Fang and Villablanca
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
The patient was stable and asymptomatic on the
ﬁrst day postprocedure. However, the patient sub-
sequently
experienced
embolic
phenomena,
pre-
senting with acute right lower limb ischemia the
next
day.
Angiography
showed
occlusion
at
the
level of the common femoral artery with poor distal
runoff, which we managed with balloon angioplasty
through the left radial approach. Interprocedurally,
additional emboli to the superﬁcial femoral artery
and pre-existing critical disease in the posterior
tibialis-peroneal bifurcation required further revas-
cularization from a right femoral access. We ach-
ieved a good angiographic result, but 2 days later
the patient presented with acute stroke with left
homonymous hemianopia and was deemed unsuit-
able for cerebral reperfusion therapy because of
high bleeding and procedural risk. Computed to-
mography showed a right occipital infarct (Figure 5).
Three
days
later,
she
developed
acute
kidney
injury that responded poorly to dialysis. She was
transitioned
to
comfort
care
and
died
10
days
afterward.
PITFALLS AND CORRECTIVE
PROCEDURAL STEPS
1. Retrieval of a lost wire from a snare (Figure 6)
B BASILICA requires 2 guiding catheters, 1 for
traversal
and
1
for
snaring.
After
leaﬂet
traversal with a 0.014-inch coronary wire, usu-
ally the Astato 20 wire (Asahi Intecc Medical,
USA), under electrosurgery cut, the wire is
snared by a gooseneck snare. The wire is then
carefully brought back into the snaring guide,
whereas a ﬂying V is created and fed through
the hemostatic valve system of the traversal
guide. To negotiate the ﬂying V through the
hemostatic
valve,
we
recommend
removing
the valve from the guide, manually negotiating
the ﬂying V through it, and then reattaching the
valve to the guide. The speed of feeding the
wire should match that of pulling the snare;
otherwise, the wire could be lost. This is espe-
cially important when the feeding and pulling
of the wire are performed by 2 operators.
FIGURE 3
Accidental Snaring of the THV
(A) Leaﬂet traversal. (B) Positioning the transcatheter heart valve (THV). (C and D) THV accidentally snared by the ﬂying V and lacerating the balloon. (E) Position of the
ﬂying V was identiﬁed to be ventricular.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Fang and Villablanca
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
B If the wire is lost inside the guide or the long
sheath,
a
0.035-inch
compatible
peripheral
balloon can be advanced to the position of the
lost wire and inﬂated against the guide or
sheath to trap the wire. Then, the guide and
sheath can be removed as a unit to externalize
the lost wire. Adequate wire length should be
ensured ahead of the balloon to avoid losing
access. The sheath with a dilator is then care-
fully reinserted over both wires. Alternatively,
multiple coronary guidewires can be passed to
the point of wire loss and intertwined by rota-
tion to manually create a snaring system suit-
able
for
use
in
a
conﬁned
space.
The
intertwined wires can then be pulled back as a
unit
and
untwined
once
the
loss
wire
is
externalized.
2. How the accidental snaring of the valve could have
been avoided
B After BASILICA, severe aortic regurgitation may
occur. Before laceration, the aortic valve is
usually crossed to place a pigtail catheter in the
left ventricle. The leaﬂet is then lacerated, and a
circular-tip
wire
is
placed
in
the
ventricle
through the pigtail to deliver a prepared THV
for deployment.
B In this case, we prepositioned a THV above the
aortic annulus to shorten the time with severe
aortic regurgitation. However, this led to inad-
vertent damage of the THV by the ﬂying V.
B From
the
multicenter
perspective
BASILICA
trial,
transient
hypotension
is
uncommon,
occurring in 6.7% of cases during BASILICA
(2/30).1 In vitro studies have also shown that
FIGURE 4
Aortic Deployment of the First THV and Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
(A) A nucleus balloon brought back the ﬁrst transcatheter aortic valve (THV) to the descending aorta. (B to D) Transcatheter aortic valve replacement with a second
THV. (E) A stent was used to pin the leaﬂet of the ﬁrst THV to the aorta.
Fang and Villablanca
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
after BASILICA without balloon augmentation,
the leaﬂet splay tends to fold back in diastole.
Therefore,
strong
clinical
justiﬁcation
is
required for propositioning of THV near the
annulus before leaﬂet laceration when per-
forming BASILICA.
B Operators should check the position of the
ﬂying V and ensure that it is well apposed to the
base of the cusp before crossing into the left
ventricle.
3. How to deploy a balloon-expandable THV when its
balloon is ruptured
B Wire access to the valve should always be
maintained.
B The Nucleus balloon (B. Braun Interventional
Systems, USA) has a waist and can be used
to
retrieve
undeployed
THVs
by
gentle
inﬂation within the THV and deployment in
the
descending
aorta
away
from
side
branches.
FIGURE 5
Acute Lower Limb Ischemia and Stroke From Multiple Emboli
(A) Angiograms before closure. (B) Right femoral angiogram the next day. (C to G) Further emboli and disease downstream requiring revascularization. (H) Right
occipital infarct after 2 days. Abbreviation as in Figure 2.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Fang and Villablanca
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
FIGURE 6
Schematic Diagram
(A) Flying V delivery. (B) Balloon-trapping technique for wire rescue.
Fang and Villablanca
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
B Avoid inﬂation of valves or balloons that are
oversized compared with aortic diameter, as
doing so could lead to aortic dissection.
B A stent can be used to pin the leaﬂets of the
THV to the wall to avoid potentially detrimental
hemodynamic effects of pin-wheeled leaﬂets of
valves deployed in aortas smaller than the
valve.
4. Snowball effect of complications
B Complications could result from minor errors.
Even with appropriate management, sequelae
such as embolic phenomenon, which may or
may not be related, could still occur
CONCLUSIONS
BASILICA is a complex procedure that requires a
systematic approach to ensure procedural success.
The ﬂying V position should be checked for good
apposition to the cusp before recrossing into the left
ventricle
with
any
wire.
Hypotension
during
BASILICA is uncommon. Therefore, prepositioning
of a THV during BASILICA is usually unnecessary
and should be used only when strongly justiﬁed.
Embolic phenomenon might occur after TAVR with
BASILICA.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Villablanca is a consultant for Edwards Lifesciences and Teleﬂex.
Dr Fang has reported that he has no relationships relevant to the
contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Jonathan
X.
Fang, MBBS, Center for Structural Heart Disease,
Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 West Grand Boulevard,
Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA. E-mail: fangjonathan@
gmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E
1. Khan JM, Greenbaum AB, Babaliaros VC, et al.
The
BASILICA
trial:
prospective
multicenter
investigation of intentional leaﬂet laceration to
prevent TAVR coronary obstruction. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2019;12(13):1240–1252.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, complication,
valve replacement
APPENDIX For a supplemental video,
please see the online version of this article.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 3 , 2 0 2 5
Fang and Villablanca
J U N E 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 2
Do Not BASILICA the New Valve
9
