
=== PAGE 1 ===
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Iatrogenic Reopening of a 
Congenital VSD After TAVR
Thomas J. Mason, MD, Lauren T. Lastinger, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has become an increasingly used technique for 
patients with severe aortic stenosis who are at high risk of perioperative mortality during surgical valve replacement.
CASE SUMMARY Here we describe the first case to our knowledge of a patient with a congenital perimembranous 
ventricular septal defect with prior spontaneous closure who experienced a post-TAVR acquired intracardiac shunt 
(AICS) due to the reopening of her ventricular septal defect, which caused new-onset heart failure and required surgical 
closure.
DISCUSSION AICS is a known complication of TAVR, but its risk in patients with congenital heart disease, particularly 
of the intraventricular septum, is poorly understood.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES In patients with congenital heart disease, detailed structural imaging should be obtained to 
better understand the anatomy before TAVR. Additionally, any patient with new-onset heart failure post-TAVR 
should be promptly evaluated for AICS. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105228) © 2025 The Authors. Published by 
Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the 
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 74-year-old woman with severe aortic stenosis 
status after a recent transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (TAVR) presented with several months
of worsening shortness of breath and fatigue. Prior to 
her TAVR, she had been experiencing moderate 
dyspnea with exertion and was found to have 
moderate-to-severe aortic stenosis, with a valve area 
of 0.8 cm 2 , peak gradient of 43 mm Hg, and mean 
gradient of 33 mm Hg. At that point, given her age 
and high perioperative risk for open valve replace-
ment, she elected to undergo TAVR with a 29-mm 
balloon-expandable Sapien S3 valve (Edwards 
Lifesciences) (Figure 1). Balloon dilation was not 
performed postplacement, and no immediate proce-
dural complications were evident, with post-
procedure 
transthoracic 
echocardiogram 
(TTE) 
demonstrating a well-seated valve without residual 
stenosis 
or 
paravalvular 
leak. 
Three 
days
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Intracardiac shunt is a known complication 
of TAVR, occurring in 0.5% to 1% of cases, 
but the risk in patients with CHD is unclear.
• After 
TAVR, 
patients 
should 
undergo 
detailed imaging to evaluate for new AICS, 
and the hemodynamic significance of any 
new shunt should be fully elucidated.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105228
From the Department of Cardiology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received March 3, 2025; revised manuscript received June 25, 2025, accepted July 8, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
postprocedure, she was admitted to an 
outside hospital with acute encephalopathy, 
hyponatremia, and volume overload that
responded to diuresis. Over the ensuing
6 weeks, she had 5 additional hospitalizations
for management of decompensated heart
failure complicated by hyponatremia and
bilateral pleural effusions. During one of
the hospitalizations, she developed right
upper quadrant pain and was found to have
mildly elevated transaminases and new
cirrhotic liver morphology. On examination, 
she was dyspneic with minimal exertion 
and consistently had cannon V waves as well as a 
pulsatile liver edge.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a history of severe aortic stenosis, 
permanent atrial fibrillation status after remote 
atrioventricular node ablation and dual-chamber 
pacemaker, and heart failure with recovered ejec-
tion fraction. She reported being told as a child that 
she had a hole in her heart that might require sur-
gery, but no intervention had been performed, and 
her murmur reportedly resolved.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Potential etiologies for her newly decompensated 
heart failure included a TAVR bioprosthesis migra-
tion, post-TAVR shunt, silent myocardial infarction 
and subsequent development of ischemic cardiomy-
opathy, pulmonary arterial hypertension, and com-
plications of pulmonary thromboembolism. The 
temporal nature of her symptom onset strongly 
favored a complication of her TAVR procedure.
INVESTIGATIONS
The patient was transferred to our tertiary care cen-
ter, where TTE revealed a new, moderate-sized per-
imembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) with 
left-to-right shunting, peak velocity of 3.2 m/s, and 
peak gradient of 42 mm Hg. Her TAVR was well-
seated and was functioning normally. Notably, 
shunting through the VSD was not present on pre-
TAVR imaging. Transesophageal echocardiogram 
confirmed the perimembranous VSD, which was 
partially closed with aneurysmal tricuspid valve tis-
sue and measured 7 mm at the left ventricular inlet 
and 4 mm at the right ventricular outlet (Figure 2C). 
The transesophageal echocardiogram also revealed
FIGURE 1 Pre-TAVR TTE Images and TAVR Angiogram
(A) Preoperative TTE demonstrating the perimembranous VSD closed with a thin band of aneurysmal tricuspid valve tissue. (B) Color Doppler showing a lack of flow 
across the closed lesion. (C) Angiogram after TAVR implantation showing the position of the bioprosthesis and lack of temporary right ventricular pacing leads. 
TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement; TTE = transthoracic echocardiogram; VSD = ventricular septal defect.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AICS = acquired intracardiac
shunt
CHD = congenital heart disease
LVOT = left ventricular
outflow tract
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiogram
VSD = ventricular septal
defect
Mason and Lastinger 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
Reopening of Congenital VSD After TAVR 
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 8
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 2 TEE Views of the VSD
(A) Hemodynamically significant flow across the VSD, with a maximum velocity (V max ) of 3.2 m/s, peak gradient of 42 mm Hg, and blood 
pressure of 101/61 (B) Color compare across the VSD. (C) Color compare showing the VSD flow in proximity to the TAVR and measuring the 
VSD diameter of 0.7 cm at the left ventricular inlet. (D) VSD flow and associated tricuspid regurgitation. Abbreviations as in Figure 1.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5 
Mason and Lastinger
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 8 
Reopening of Congenital VSD After TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
new severe tricuspid regurgitation. Right heart 
catheterization showed mixed pre-/postcapillary 
pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery 
pressure: 47 mm Hg, pulmonary capillary wedge 
pressure: 27 mm Hg, pulmonary vascular resistance: 
3.3 WU), and evidence of a left-to-right intracardiac 
shunt, with a pulmonary-to-systemic blood flow 
ratio of 1.5. After significant diuresis, there was 
improvement in her hemodynamics (mean pulmo-
nary artery pressure: 37 mm Hg, pulmonary capil-
lary wedge pressure: 20 mm Hg, pulmonary 
vascular resistance: 2.7 Wood units) but an increase 
in the degree of left-to-right shunting, with a 
pulmonary-to-systemic blood flow ratio of 2.1 
(Table 1).
MANAGEMENT
Based on the appearance and location of the VSD and 
careful review of her preoperative TTE and clinical 
course post-TAVR, we hypothesized that the existing 
aneurysmal tricuspid valve tissue that had previously 
spontaneously closed her congenital VSD had 
ruptured during her TAVR procedure (Figure 1). This 
resulted in significant left-to-right shunting that led 
to her recurrent decompensated heart failure. 
Approximately 2 months post-TAVR, she underwent 
a complex open surgical repair that included patch 
closure of the VSD, repair of congenitally dysplastic 
tricuspid valve leaflets, removal of existing trans-
venous pacing leads, and placement of an epicardial 
pacemaker. During the clinical course, it was noted 
that there was an “obvious dehiscence of an atypical
perimembranous VSD that closed with aneurysmal 
tissue.” At that time, the patient was also noted to 
have an iatrogenic left ventricular outflow tract 
(LVOT)–to–right atrial injury (Gerbode defect) just 
inferior to the proximal margin of the TAVR frame-
work, which was repaired. Postoperative TTE 
demonstrated complete closure of the VSD, a trivial 
residual Gerbode defect, and mild tricuspid 
regurgitation.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient’s postoperative course was complicated 
by recurrent pleural effusions that required bilateral 
pleural catheter placement. She was discharged to a 
rehabilitation facility approximately 2 weeks after 
her procedure. As of her most recent follow-up 
approximately 30 months postoperatively, she was 
off loop diuretics, was active in her garden, and was 
doing well overall.
DISCUSSION
Though generally safe and effective, TAVR is associ-
ated with periprocedural risks including coronary 
obstruction, annular rupture, tamponade, conduc-
tion system disruption, stroke, and infective endo-
carditis. Less commonly, TAVR has been associated 
with a risk of acquired intracardiac shunt (AICS), with 
an estimated incidence of 0.5% to 1.0%. 1-4 Risk fac-
tors for AICS in patients without congenital heart 
disease (CHD) include balloon-expandable valve use, 
oversizing of the valve, low implantation of the
TABLE 1 Right Heart Catheterization Hemodynamics
Prediuresis
Postdiuresis
Weight (kg)
67.9
65.5
Right atrium (mm Hg)
18
10
Right ventricle (mm Hg)
73/19
62/10
Pulmonary artery (mm Hg)
74/30 (47)
64/21 (37)
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (mm Hg)
27
20
Blood pressure (mm Hg)
107/62 (80)
110/73 (85)
Oxygen saturation (%)
SVC: 43, RA: 54, RV: 71, PA: 69, 
Ao (pulse oxygen): 96
SVC: 43, RA: 58, RV: 76, PA: 72, 
Ao (pulse oxygen): 98
Cardiac output, Fick (L/min)
3.5
5.5
Cardiac index, Fick (L/min/m 2 )
2.1
3.3
Pulmonary blood flow
6.0
6.4
Systemic blood flow
4.1
3.0
Pulmonary-to-systemic blood flow ratio
1.5
2.1
Pulmonary vascular resistance (WU)
3.3
2.7
Systemic vascular resistance (WU)
15.2
25.0
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
10.0
9.3
Serial right heart catheterization hemodynamics showing atrial and ventricular level left-to-right shunting, with increased pulmonary shunt fraction when the patient was 
adequately diuresed.
Ao = aorta; PA = pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle; SVC = superior vena cava.
Mason and Lastinger 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
Reopening of Congenital VSD After TAVR 
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 8
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
valve, postimplantation balloon dilation, as well as 
the degree of aortic valve and LVOT calcification. 4
This case presents an interesting clinical scenario 
of multiple post-TAVR AICS incidents in a patient 
with CHD. Close review of her preoperative imaging 
was consistent with the presence of a pre-existing 
perimembranous VSD that had previously spontane-
ously closed via a typical mechanism with dysplastic 
tricuspid tissue (Figure 1). This was likely the etiology 
her widely appreciated heart murmur that sponta-
neously resolved in childhood. It is less likely that 
this Gerbode defect existed in childhood, given the 
lower rates of spontaneous closure; more likely, it 
was a periprocedural complication of the TAVR, 
given its location immediately adjacent to the TAVR 
bioprosthesis. 5 Given her new-onset heart failure 
after the TAVR, interval development of the 2 AICS 
incidents as described, and the intraoperative find-
ings of a clear dehiscence of aneurysmal tissue at the 
VSD site, our team suspects that the TAVR bio-
prosthesis or one of the catheters used during the 
clinical course physically displaced the aneurysmal 
tricuspid valve tissue that had previously closed the 
VSD. This would have been a weak and thin area of 
the intraventricular septum that had likely become 
more fibrotic and fragile with age, further increasing 
its vulnerability to mechanical forces. It is worth 
noting that the typical risks for iatrogenic VSD crea-
tion during TAVR were not present in this case, as the 
patient had a relatively low aortic valve calcium 
burden, no postdeployment balloon dilation was 
used, and there was no significant valve oversizing.
We believe that the reopening of the patient’s VSD 
directly resulted in her pulmonary overcirculation, 
worsening tricuspid regurgitation, and recurrent ad-
missions for decompensated heart failure. It is 
notable that many of her symptoms of right heart 
failure could be explained by the worsening of her 
tricuspid regurgitation (mild to severe) alone after 
the TAVR, but we feel that this was likely a result of 
the altered intracardiac hemodynamics after the 
reopening of her VSD and not direct damage to the 
tricuspid valve itself, given the pulmonary over-
circulation and left heart failure symptoms she also 
experienced. At the time of her initial right heart 
catheterization, her right-sided pressures were 
significantly elevated (Table 1), so we hypothesize 
that the combination of increased right-sided vol-
umes and afterload stressed the congenitally 
dysplastic valve, causing a worsening of her tricuspid 
regurgitation. We also feel there was no evidence of 
direct damage to the tricuspid valve leaflets, as re-
view of the TAVR angiogram (Figure 1C) demon-
strated that there were no pacing wires crossing the
tricuspid valve during the TAVR procedure, and on 
direct inspection during the operative case there was 
no note of any traumatic damage to the valve itself. 
Our case describes an atypical presentation of an 
acquired AICS after TAVR, a known complication of 
the procedure. 1-4 It is worth noting that our patient 
suffered significant morbidity from her AICS and 
resulting hemodynamically significant shunt, being 
hospitalized for a majority of the 2 months prior to 
her surgical repair as the significance of the reopened 
shunt was slowly elucidated. The case raises 
2 important points regarding post-TAVR AICS: The 
first is the importance of identifying these lesions 
and their hemodynamic significance early with 
dedicated LVOT imaging, especially when they are 
not immediately clinically apparent owing to hemo-
dynamic instability. Limited data from 2 case series 
suggest that the mortality rate in symptomatic pa-
tients without intervention is approximately 25% to 
33%. 1,2 Thus, prompt identification of AICS with 
detailed LVOT imaging after TAVR is critical. If new 
defects are identified, it is important to fully under-
stand their hemodynamic significance, as symptom-
atic defects are associated with worse outcomes. 1 
Conversely, nearly all asymptomatic patients with 
post-TAVR AICS did well in the absence of interven-
tion. 1-4 The second and more niche point is that as 
the identification and diagnosis of CHD lesions 
evolves, it will be important for proceduralists to 
understand how they affect perioperative risk and 
procedural specifics such as valve selection during 
TAVR. Further investigation is needed as trans-
catheter valve replacements become more prevalent.
CONCLUSIONS
To our knowledge, this is the first case of a patient 
with CHD who experienced a post-TAVR AICS due to 
a reopening of a spontaneously closed perimem-
branous VSD. The case emphasizes the importance of 
identifying and fully elucidating the clinical signifi-
cance of post-TAVR AICS, as hemodynamically sig-
nificant AICS negatively affects patient outcomes.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Lauren T.
Lastinger, Department of Cardiology, Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, 473 W 12th 
Avenue, Suite 200, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. 
E-mail: 
lauren.lastinger@osumc.edu. 
X handle: 
@LTLastingerMD.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5 
Mason and Lastinger
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 8 
Reopening of Congenital VSD After TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Rojas P, Amat-Santos IJ, Cortes C, et al. Ac-
quired aseptic intracardiac shunts following 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement: a sys-
tematic review. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9 
(24):2527–2538. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin. 
2016.09.034
2. Tomo A, Anthony AA, Tuab CC, Slovut DP,
DeRose JJ. Iatrogenic ventricular septal defect
following transcatheter aortic valve replacement:
a systematic review. Heart Lung Circ. 2016;25(10):
968–974. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlc.2016.03.
012
3. Nona P, Mahmood S, Lemor A, et al. Incidence of 
acquired ventricular septal defect after transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement: a large single center 
experience. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2021;98(5): 
975–980. https://doi.org/10.1002/ccd.29897
4. Sardar MR, Khan ZA, Abraham A, et al. Man-
agement strategies and possible risk factors for 
ventricular septal defects after transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement: case series from a single 
center and review of literature. Cardiovasc Revasc 
Med. 2017;18(6):462–470. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.carrev.2017.04.003
5. Wasserman SM, Fann JI, Atwood JE, 
Burdon TA, Fadel BM. Acquired left ventricular-
right atrial communication: gerbode-type defect. 
Echocardiography. 2002;19(1):67–72. https://doi. 
org/10.1046/j.1540-8175.2002.00067.x
KEY WORDS acute heart failure, 
congenital heart disease, transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement, ventricular septal 
defect
Mason and Lastinger 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 2 9 , 2 0 2 5
Reopening of Congenital VSD After TAVR 
S E P T E M B E R 2 4 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 2 8
6
