
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
BEYOND THE GUIDELINES
From Severe Aortic Stenosis to
Mitral TEER
Overcoming Surgical AVR Complicated With LVOTO
Tasha M. Heller, MD, Sara Lezcano, DO, Ram Hirpara, DO, Alexander K. Patel, DO, Yordanka Reyna, MD,
Faraaz Mushtaq, DO, Mohamed Osman, MD, Arnoux Blanchard, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Systolic anterior motion (SAM) and dynamic left ventricular outﬂow tract obstruction (LVOTO) is a
well-described phenomenon in hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and rarely reported after surgical aortic valve
replacement (AVR).
CASE SUMMARY We present the ﬁrst reported case of SAM and LVOTO developing intraoperatively after surgical AVR
for severe bicuspid aortic valve stenosis necessitating mitral transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (TEER) with the MitraClip.
Optimal titration of pharmacologic management was not sufﬁcient to relieve LVOTO in our patient.
WHY BEYOND THE GUIDELINES Despite management following conventional guidelines, the patient remained in
critical condition. TEER with the MitraClip led to a reduction in SAM and optimization of his cardiovascular proﬁle.
DISCUSSION There is limited literature regarding intervention with TEER on post-AVR patients.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE LVOTO can present suddenly, as in our case, necessitating a multispecialty approach to
unconventional interventions to stabilize a critically ill patient. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103886) © 2025 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under
the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
S
ystolic anterior motion (SAM) is deﬁned as
displacement of the anterior mitral valve into
the left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT).
It
is
classically
associated
with
hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) but may also
occur in critically ill patients with complex cardiac
anatomy.
Sequelae
that
are
frequently
observed
include
hypotension,
mitral
regurgitation,
and
decreased
forward
stroke
volume.
Management
typically includes medications that modify physio-
logical parameters to avoid reduction in preload, in-
crease in inotropy, or decrease in afterload.1 The
pathogenesis of SAM in patients who have undergone
aortic valve replacement (AVR) for aortic stenosis
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE
 SAM leading to dynamic LVOTO is a complex
physiological phenomenon that can occur in
myriad cardiac pathologies that may require
clinicians to think beyond traditional guide-
lines to prevent hemodynamic collapse.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103886
From the Cardiovascular Disease Broward Health Medical Center, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received December 17, 2024; revised manuscript received February 24, 2025, accepted March 5, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
likely involves increased left ventricular wall
thickness, drag on the anterior mitral leaﬂet
due to increased blood velocity in the LVOT,
and a small hypertrophied left ventricular
cavity.1
CASE SUMMARY
A 64-year-old man with a medical history
signiﬁcant for bicuspid aortic valve, dilated
ascending
aorta
(4.9
cm),
hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, and mild pulmonary hyper-
tension was recently diagnosed with severe
aortic stenosis (maximum velocity 5 m/s,
mean gradient 56 mm Hg, aortic valve area
0.8 cm2). He presented for elective AVR with
a 25-mm bioprosthesis, replacement of the ascending
aorta with a 30-mm Hemashield interposition graft
(Getinge) and clipping of the left atrial appendage
with a 35-mm AtriClip (AtriCure). Intraoperatively,
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed a
maximum velocity of 4.5 m/s and a mean gradient of
39 mm Hg for the aortic valve. LVOT gradients were
normal (Figure 1).
Post-AVR
TEE
showed
redundant mitral
valve
leaﬂets and chordae with SAM and moderate mitral
regurgitation (Figure 2). These ﬁndings were not
present pre-AVR. The procedure was complicated by
signiﬁcant bleeding, necessitating substantial blood
product transfusion. Although the patient was suc-
cessfully extubated postoperatively, his cardiopul-
monary
status
deteriorated
in
subsequent
days,
requiring
reintubation.
Differential
diagnoses
included transfusion-related acute lung injury and
aspiration pneumonia. Chest imaging showed peri-
hilar ground-glass opacities suggestive of pulmonary
edema. The patient was started on empirical antibi-
otics and required escalating vasopressor support
with norepinephrine, vasopressin, and phenyleph-
rine. Phenylephrine was chosen for its ability to
induce reﬂex bradycardia, thereby extending dia-
stolic duration, and increasing left ventricular after-
load. High fraction of inspired oxygen and positive
end-expiratory
pressure
up
to
12
cm
H2O
were
required for pulmonary support. Intravenous diuretic
agents were initiated to achieve euvolemia.
Despite aggressive pharmacologic management,
the patient remained dependent on phenylephrine.
Repeat TEE revealed persistent severe mitral regur-
gitation at the A2 position, with a redundant anterior
mitral leaﬂet, SAM, and LVOT obstruction (LVOTO)
(Video 1).
Patient-prosthesis
mismatch
was
unlikely,
as
Doppler velocity index of the prosthetic aortic valve
was 1.8, with a triangular jet contour and effective
oriﬁce area of 5 cm2 (Figure 3). Errors in measure-
ments can certainly be possible, as the LVOT Doppler
proﬁle was aliasing, likely because of high velocity
(Figure 3). We were able to capture a high velocity
with
continuous-wave
Doppler
in
the
LVOT.
A
multidisciplinary team involving intensive care, car-
diology, cardiothoracic surgery, and cardiac anes-
thesia
convened
and
concluded
that
mitral
transcatheter
edge-to-edge
repair
(TEER)
with
a
MitraClip (Abbott Laboratories) was the most appro-
priate next step in intervention rather than pursuing
surgical correction of the mitral valve.
The patient underwent successful TEER with a
MitraClip
XTW
deployed
at
the
A2-P2
position
(Figure 4). Postprocedurally, mitral regurgitation was
reduced to grades 2 to 3, and pulmonary vein ﬂow
reversal resolved completely. With the resolution of
dynamic LVOTO, vasopressors were gradually dis-
continued, and beta-blockers were initiated for heart
rate control, in line with dynamic LVOTO manage-
ment guidelines.
WHY BEYOND THE GUIDELINES. Our case demon-
strates the application of conventional medical ther-
apy
for
SAM,
including
the
maintenance
of
FIGURE 1
Intraoperative Pre-AV Replacement Transesophageal Echocardiography
Continuous-wave Doppler showing aortic velocity and pressure proﬁles consistent with
severe aortic stenosis. AV ¼ aortic valve; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract;
Max ¼ maximum; PG ¼ pressure gradient; Vmax ¼ maximum velocity; Vmean ¼ mean
velocity; VR ¼ velocity ratio; VTI ¼ velocity-time integral.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AVR = aortic valve
replacement
HOCM = hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy
LVOT = left ventricular outﬂow
tract
LVOTO = left ventricular
outﬂow tract obstruction
SAM = systolic anterior motion
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
TEER = transcatheter edge-to-
edge repair
Heller et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Severe Aortic Stenosis to Mitral TEER
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 6
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 2
Intraoperative Post-Aortic Valve Replacement Transesophageal Echocardiography
Severe, eccentric mitral regurgitation seen with systolic anterior motion that extends in the left ventricular outﬂow tract, causing dynamic
obstruction.
FIGURE 3
Beside Transthoracic in the Intensive Care Unit
(A) Left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT) proﬁle with pulsed-wave Doppler demonstrating aliasing. (B) Prosthetic aortic valve Doppler proﬁle. (C) LVOT Doppler proﬁle.
LV ¼ left ventricular; other abbreviations as in Figure 1.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Heller et al
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 6
Severe Aortic Stenosis to Mitral TEER
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
euvolemia, beta-blocker use, and phenylephrine as
the vasopressor of choice. However, the decision to
pursue watchful diuresis, combined with the invasive
intervention using the MitraClip, represents a strat-
egy that extends beyond standard guidelines.
CASE OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The intervention successfully alleviated the LVOTO.
The patient was weaned off vasopressor support and
diuretic agents and was discharged to long-term
rehabilitation after a 36-day hospitalization. Follow-
up echocardiography demonstrated improved aortic
velocity and gradients. LVOT gradients were checked
with a Valsalva maneuver and remained normal
(Figure 5). These ﬁndings coupled with his improve-
ment in clinical status are evidence that patient-
prosthesis mismatch was extremely unlikely and
that there were improper LVOT velocities and gradi-
ents. He subsequently completed outpatient follow-
FIGURE 4
Intraoperative Mitral Transcatheter Edge-to-Edge Repair With MitraClip
(A) MitraClip deployment at the A2-P2 position with reduction of mitral regurgitation. (B) Reduction of mitral regurgitation with no signiﬁcant
stenosis.
Heller et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Severe Aortic Stenosis to Mitral TEER
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 6
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
up with cardiothoracic surgery and advanced heart
failure specialists.
DISCUSSION
Our case highlights a unique but critical aspect of
cardiac physiology. SAM is traditionally associated
with
HOCM
but
can
also
occur
because
of
left
ventricular
hypertrophy
secondary
to
aortic
valve stenosis.1 The exact mechanism of SAM is not
fully understood, but it likely arises from a com-
bination of anatomical abnormalities and physio-
logical
changes
that
increase
the
likelihood
of
LVOTO.
Proposed mechanisms for this dynamic condition
include both mechanical and physiological factors.
Mechanical
causes
involve
myxomatous
mitral
pathology, elongation of the anterior mitral leaﬂet,
left
ventricular
hypertrophy,
a
mitroaortic
angle
#130, posterior mitral valve leaﬂet length > 19 mm,
and
a
distance
between
coaptation
and
septum
of <25 mm or a relatively small left ventricular
cavity.2-4 In the context of surgical AVR, factors such
as a sigmoid-shaped septum, asymmetrical septal
hypertrophy
(septal-to-ventricular
free
wall
ratio
>1.4), increased basal septal thickness (>15 mm), and
a narrow LVOT (<18 mm) have been identiﬁed as risk
factors for LVOTO.4,5 Retrospectively, our patient had
the following measurements that were collected from
the intraoperative TEE: presystolic coaptation and
septum distance was measured at 1.7 cm, indicating
high risk for SAM (Figure 6).
Long-standing aortic stenosis includes a chroni-
cally elevated left ventricular systolic pressure and
FIGURE 5
Post-MitraClip Transthoracic Echocardiography
Apical 5-chamber views: (A) left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT) gradient at rest, (B) LVOT gradient with Valsalva maneuver, and (C) aortic valve velocity proﬁle with
continuous-wave Doppler. Abbreviations as in Figure 1.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Heller et al
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 6
Severe Aortic Stenosis to Mitral TEER
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
subsequent left ventricular hypertrophy. The high
afterload also leads to what has been dubbed a
“splinting effect” on left ventricular walls, preventing
LVOTO. Post-AVR, the ﬁxed obstruction is removed,
leading to a dramatic decrease in end-systolic pres-
sure and increased ﬂow. The dynamic mechanism for
these physiological ﬁndings is believed to be sec-
ondary to increased drag forces and the Venturi ef-
fect, leading to SAM.6
Current literature includes one prior report of a
MitraClip used to treat dynamic LVOTO following
mitral valve replacement and a recent case report
describing TEER with a MitraClip used in a patient
after transcatheter AVR. To our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst reported case of MitraClip intervention after
surgical AVR for aortic stenosis. There is limited data
on
this
intervention,
and
one
small
study
was
completed on 6 patients with HOCM, all of whom
were poor surgical candidates for surgical interven-
tion.7 Before performing a MitraClip procedure, fac-
tors to consider include the size of the atrium and the
distance
to
the
mitral
valve,
as
there
must
be
adequate space for the device. Additionally, the
location of the transeptal puncture, creation of an
atrial septal defect, and attention to the mitral valve
gradient are important. The MitraClip XTW is typi-
cally preferred because of stronger grip strength and
VISUAL SUMMARY
Patient’s Clinical Journey During Hospitalization
Postoperative
Day
Events
0
The patient presented for elective AVR with 25-mm in-spur bioprosthesis, replacement of ascending aorta with 30-mm Hemashield
interposition tube graft, and clipping left atrial appendage with 35-mm AtriClip. Intraoperatively, the patient had extensive
bleeding that required multiple blood products: 7 U packed red blood cells, 10 U cryoprecipitate, 8 U fresh frozen plasma, 4 U
platelets, NovoSeven (Novo Nordisk), and Kcentra (CSL Behring). It was noted during the procedure that the patient had septal
hypertrophy, which led to SAM and moderate MR.
1
The patient was extubated and restarted on norepinephrine drip because of hypotension. Diuretic medications were held.
2
Left-sided thoracentesis was performed, with 500 ml ﬂuid removed.
3
The patient had increasing O2 requirements and required reintubation.
4
The vasopressor of choice was transitioned to phenylephrine.
5
Worsening hypotension with associated fever was observed. Vasopressin and norepinephrine with empiric antibiotics were added.
7
Bedside 3D TEE was completed, showing persistent SAM and LVOTO.
9
The patient had increasing oxygen requirements with chest radiographic ﬁndings concerning for worsening pulmonary edema. IV
diuresis was initiated.
13
Respiratory status improved, with reduced FIO2 and PEEP requirements. Vasopressor requirements began to decrease.
14
IV diuresis was discontinued. The patient underwent transcatheter edge-to-edge repair with a MitraClip XTW. All vasopressors were
discontinued.
17
Oral beta-blockers were initiated.
29
The patient was transferred out of the ICU.
30
Repeat left-sided thoracentesis was performed, with drainage of 1,400 mL ﬂuid.
36
The patient was discharged from the hospital and admitted to inpatient rehabilitation.
50
The patient was discharged from inpatient rehabilitation with home health care.
83
Follow-up echocardiography was performed, showing an ejection fraction of 60%-65%, with the MitraClip in a good position.
The mitral valve mean pressure gradient was 4 mm Hg, the aortic valve mean pressure gradient was 10 mm Hg, and the maximum
left ventricular outﬂow tract gradient was 17 mm Hg.
127
The patient continues to follow up with advanced heart failure, cardiothoracic surgery, and pulmonology.
3D ¼ 3-dimensional; AVR ¼ aortic valve replacement; FIO2 ¼ fraction of inspired oxygen; ICU ¼ intensive care unit; IV ¼ intravenous; LVOTO ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract
obstruction; MR ¼ mitral regurgitation; PEEP ¼ positive end expiratory pressure; SAM ¼ systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve; TEE ¼ transesophageal echocardiography.
FIGURE 6
Bedside Transesophageal Echocardiography in the Intensive Care Unit
Coaptation and septum distance of 1.7 cm measured at presystole and left ventricular
outﬂow tract of 2.24 cm.
Heller et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Severe Aortic Stenosis to Mitral TEER
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 6
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
wider grasping area, but the speciﬁc selection de-
pends on the patient’s anatomy. The primary goals of
the procedure are to address LVOTO, mitral regurgi-
tation, and SAM to optimize the patient’s hemody-
namic status.
Our case is a contribution to the literature for non-
HOCM scenarios. Although mitral valve replacement
or septal reduction therapy are potential treatment
options, our team opted for the MitraClip to tempo-
rarily stabilize the patient’s condition, with the goal
of allowing the left ventricle to recover and normalize
its wall thickness.
CONCLUSIONS
Treatment of patients with SAM classically involves
medical management, focusing on increasing left
ventricular preload and afterload while decreasing
heart rate to prolong the diastolic period. This case
represents the ﬁrst known report of SAM after surgical
AVR successfully managed with MitraClip placement
in conjunction with medical therapy. Suboptimal
postoperative outcomes in patients with marked left
ventricular hypertrophy, especially those exhibiting
low-output syndromes unresponsive to interventions
aimed
at
enhancing
contractility,
should
prompt
clinicians to consider the possibility of dynamic
LVOTO.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Tasha Heller,
Cardiology Department, Broward Health Medical Center,
1600 S Andrews Avenue, Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33316,
USA. E-mail: tashamiaheller@gmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Raut M, Maheshwari A, Swain B. Awareness of
“systolic anteriormotion” in different conditions. Clin
Med Insights Cardiol. 2018;12:117954681775192.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1179546817751921
2. Kerut EK, Hanawalt C, Dearstine M, Frank R,
Everson C. Mitral systolic anterior motion (SAM)
with dynamic left ventricular outﬂow obstruction
following aortic valve replacement. Echocardiog-
raphy. 2007;24(6):658–660.
3. Zaki JF, Markham T, Choi W, Moise O, Aijazi M,
Sheinbaum R. Systolic anterior motion of the
mitral valve after aortic valve replacement. Proc
(Baylor Univ Med Cent). 2018;31(2):203–204.
4. Nicoara A, Skubas N, Swaminathan M. Of
heights, lengths, and distances. J Am Soc Echo-
cardiogr. 2021;34(1):104.
5. Weich HSvH, John TJ, Joubert L, Moses J,
HerbstP,Doubell A.Dynamicleft ventricular outﬂow
tract obstruction post–transcatheter aortic valve
replacement. JACC Case Rep. 2021;3(6):871–874.
6. Makhija N, Magoon R, Balakrishnan I, Das S,
Malik V, Gharde P. Left ventricular outﬂow tract
obstruction following aortic valve replacement: a
review of risk factors, mechanism, and manage-
ment. Ann Card Anaesth. 2019;22(1):1–5. https://
doi.org/10.4103/aca.ACA_226_17
7. Sorajja P, Pedersen W, Bae R, et al. First expe-
rience with percutaneous mitral valve plication as
primary therapy for symptomatic obstructive hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2016;67(24):2811–2818.
KEY WORDS acute heart failure,
echocardiography, hypertrophy, MitraClip,
regurgitation
APPENDIX For a supplemental video,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Heller et al
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 6
Severe Aortic Stenosis to Mitral TEER
7
