
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE: DAVINCI CORNER
3D Model Guiding Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Replacement in a Patient With
Aortic Coarctation
Mirvat A. Alasnag, MD, Ibrahim M. Al-Nasser, MD, Massimo M. Porqueddu, MD, Waqar H. Ahmed, MD,
Khalid F. Al-Shaibi, MD
ABSTRACT
We demonstrate the utility of a printed 3-dimensional model to assist in the vascular access planning for a transcatheter
aortic valve replacement in an elderly woman with complicated vascular anatomy including aortic coarctation,
severe iliofemoral disease, and a small and tortuous left subclavian artery. (Level of Difﬁculty: Intermediate.)
(J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2020;2:352–7) © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College
of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 77-year-old frail female patient was seen in the
clinic
with
progressive
dyspnea
over
a
3-month
period. On physical examination, she had a blood
pressure of 140/70 mm Hg in both arms and a loud
ejection systolic murmur radiating to the carotid
arteries.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The past history was signiﬁcant only for longstanding
hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The only differential diagnosis was degenerative
aortic stenosis that warranted an initial workup by
echocardiogram.
INVESTIGATIONS
An echocardiogram showed a bicuspid aortic valve
with severe stenosis (peak gradient, 120 mm Hg; mean
gradient, 75 mm Hg; maximum velocity, 5.5 m/s). The
ejection fraction was 60%. Coarctation of the aorta was
conﬁrmed by a computed tomography angiography
(CTA). This was a type 2A bicuspid valve with a raphe
between the right and noncoronary cusps. An invasive
coronary angiogram showed mild coronary artery dis-
ease with a maximum gradient across the coarctation
by direct invasive measurement of only 10 mm Hg
(possibly underestimated because of severe aortic
stenosis). She was evaluated by the cardiac surgeons
for surgical replacement of the aortic valve, and they
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To
understand
the
importance
of
pre-
planning complex structural interventions
 To explore the utility of 3D modeling and
simulation in the planning of complex
interventions
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2020.01.021
From the Cardiac Center, King Fahd Armed Forces Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. The authors have reported that they have no
relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, or patient consent where appropriate. For more information, visit the
JACC: Case Reports author instructions page.
Manuscript received October 10, 2019; revised manuscript received January 10, 2020, accepted January 23, 2020.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 2 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 0
ª 2 0 2 0 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E
O F
C A R D I O L O G Y
F O U N D A T I O N .
T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
deemed it too high risk. Accordingly, we evaluated her
for percutaneous transcatheter replacement of the
aortic valve (TAVR). The CTA measurements obtained
were as follows: bicuspid aortic valve annulus area was
291.4 mm2, and perimeter derived diameter was
19.6 mm. The sinotubular junction diameter was
25.2 mm, ascending thoracic aortic diameter was
29.7 mm, and descending thoracic aortic diameter
beyond the coarctation was 31.1 mm. The annulus to
left main ostium distance was 13.2 mm, and the
annulus to right coronary artery ostium distance
was
14.8
mm.
The
peripheral
vessels
were
diffusely diseased with calciﬁcation and tortuosity.
The right common iliac artery diameter was 5.9 mm,
and the left common iliac artery diameter was 5.8 mm
(Figures 1 to 5).
As such, a transfemoral TAVR was deemed un-
suitable, and we explored an alternative access.
Upon reviewing the CTA, the distal segment of the
left axillary artery was 4.7 mm, and the proximal
segment was 7.2 mm. The left subclavian
artery was 6.6 mm.
MANAGEMENT (MEDICAL/
INTERVENTIONS)
In view of the small caliber of the distal
segment
of
the
axillary
artery
and
the
severely angulated take-off of the subclavian artery
from the dilated segment of the aortic arch just
proximal to the coarctation, we opted to create a
3-dimensional (3D) print of the vasculature. The
purpose of an in vitro model was to select the most
appropriate access point and assess the ability to
track a delivery sheath and valve across this unique
anatomy (coarctation with dilatation and tortuous
aorta). The 3D printer used was Stratasys J450 Digital
Anatomy system. The material used was acrylonitrile
butadiene styrene ﬁlament, and the 3D modeling
software used in converting Digital Imaging and
FIGURE 1
Computed Tomography Angiography of the
Coarctation (Lateral Projection)
A 3-dimensional reconstruction of the thoracic aorta in the
lateral projection, showing the coarctation and post-stenotic
dilation of the descending thoracic aorta.
FIGURE 2
Computed Tomography Angiography of the
Coarctation (Posterior Projection)
A 3-dimensional reconstruction of the thoracic aorta in the
posterior projection, showing the coarctation and post-
stenotic dilation of the descending thoracic aorta.
SEE PAGE 358
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
3D = 3-dimensional
CTA = computed tomography
angiography
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 0
Alasnag et al.
M A R C H 2 0 2 0 : 3 5 2 – 7
3D Model Guiding Structural Interventions
353

=== PAGE 3 ===
Communications in Medicine (DICOM) to Stereo-
Lithography (STL) segmenting and volume rendering
was the Mimics inPrint system (Materialise, Leuven,
Belgium). Several access points were examined with
the 3D model, including the proximal left subclavian
artery and distal part of the axillary artery. Based on
the model, a surgical cut down of the proximal
segment of the left axillary artery was selected. The
valve delivery and deployment were also simulated
step by step. With the left subclavian access, it was
more difﬁcult to negotiate the acute angle of the
subclavian artery (60) and aortic arch compared with
the axillary artery approach (Figures 6 to 9).
The procedure was performed by using the agreed-
on access point and was completed successfully with
a CoreValve Evolut R size 23 valve (Medtronic, Santa
Rosa, California). The valve was post-dilated with a
size 20 NuMED (Brooklyn, New York) balloon. Post-
implantation
mean
gradient
across
the
valve
measured
by
both
echocardiography
and
direct
invasive measurement was 5 mm Hg. There was only
mild paravalvular regurgitation. Complete hemosta-
sis at the arteriotomy site was obtained after tying the
purse-string sutures (Figures 10 and 11).
DISCUSSION
Alternate
access
TAVR
has
conventionally
been
through transapical or direct transaortic approaches,
both of which are very invasive and require surgical
involvement (1–3). More recently, the transaxillary,
transcarotid,
and
transcaval
percutaneous
ap-
proaches have been adopted as less invasive options
(4–9). Given the extreme tortuosity and the coarcta-
tion of the aorta, the transcaval approach was deemed
FIGURE 3
Left Subclavian and Axillary Arteries by Computed
Tomography Angiography
A 2-dimenstional maximum intensity projection image showing the relationship of the
arteries to the ﬁrst rib and the angulation of the vessels.
FIGURE 4
Aortic Valve by Computed Tomography Angiography
(A) A 2-dimensional (2D) image of type 2A bicuspid valve with a raphe between the right and noncoronary cusps. (B) A 3-dimensional (3D)
image of the same valve. CTA ¼ computed tomography angiography; LC ¼ left coronary cusp; NC ¼ noncoronary cusp; RC ¼ right coronary
cusp.
Alasnag et al.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 0
3D Model Guiding Structural Interventions
M A R C H 2 0 2 0 : 3 5 2 – 7
354

=== PAGE 4 ===
unsuitable because it would still involve negotiating
the coarctation segment with the delivery system.
The conventional percutaneous transaxillary was not
possible because of the small caliber of the distal
axillary artery. Despite limited tactile feedback due to
the nature of the model material, 3D modeling and
simulation permitted several trials and adjustments
that would not have been possible in vivo. A suitable
access point in the proximal axillary artery where the
delivery sheath could be advanced safely was iden-
tiﬁed by the simulation. The model included the
valve, ascending aorta, coarctation segment, and left
subclavian and axillary arteries. The model was also
useful for describing the complex anatomy and pro-
posed procedure to the patient and her family. A vi-
sual
model
allowed
them
to
conceptualize
the
obstacles to conventional access (i.e., transfemoral)
and understand the potential vascular complications
to a percutaneous transaxillary approach. Resorting
to 3D models for structural and congenital heart dis-
ease has been described in several reports (10–12). Our
case further delineates the practical utility of this
technology.
FOLLOW-UP
At the patient’s 1-month follow-up to the outpatient
clinic, she was asymptomatic, with normal function
of her left upper limb and intact brachial and radial
pulses.
She
did
not
require
any
pacing.
The
echocardiogram showed a well-seated valve with a
mean gradient of 5 mm Hg and mild paravalvular
regurgitation; the peak gradient across the coarcta-
tion was 14 mm Hg.
FIGURE 5
Measurements of the Left Subclavian and Axillary Arteries
Measurements of the left subclavian and axillary arteries by 3-dimensional reconstructed
images on computed tomography–angiography.
FIGURE 6
Delivery Sheath Advancement
Subclavian access in the 3-dimensional (3D) model simulating
delivery sheath advancement.
FIGURE 7
Partial Deployment of the CoreValve
Subclavian access in the 3-dimensional (3D) model with partial
deployment of the CoreValve.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 0
Alasnag et al.
M A R C H 2 0 2 0 : 3 5 2 – 7
3D Model Guiding Structural Interventions
355

=== PAGE 5 ===
CONCLUSIONS
Although 3D modeling remains experimental and is
not currently recommended by guidelines, it may
have unique applications in complex anatomy, as
described in this case. In the future, 3D printing of
volumetric datasets obtained by CTA and simulation
may serve several purposes, including education (for
patients
and
trainees),
further
deﬁning
complex
anatomy, and planning interventions for structural
and congenital heart diseases. It may also allow
reﬁnement and development of novel devices and
techniques.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr.
Mirvat
Alasnag, Cardiac Center, King Fahd Armed Forces
Hospital, PO Box 9862, Jeddah 21159, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia.
E-mail:
mirvat@jeddacath.com.
Twitter:
@mirvatalasnag.
FIGURE 9
Axillary Access in the 3-Dimensional Model
Axillary access in the 3-dimensional (3D) model simulating
delivery sheath advancement.
FIGURE 10
Deployed Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Replacement CoreValve
The deployed transcatheter aortic valve replacement CoreValve
in vivo.
FIGURE 8
Fully Deployed CoreValve
Subclavian access in the 3-dimensional (3D) model with the
CoreValve fully deployed.
FIGURE 11
Left Axillary Digital Subtraction Angiography
Left axillary digital subtraction angiography (DSA) after surgical
closure of the arteriotomy in vivo upon completion of the
deployment.
Alasnag et al.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 0
3D Model Guiding Structural Interventions
M A R C H 2 0 2 0 : 3 5 2 – 7
356

=== PAGE 6 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Arai T, Romano M, Lefèvre T, et al. Direct
comparison of feasibility and safety of trans-
femoral
versus
transaortic
versus
transapical
transcatheter aortic valve replacement. J Am Coll
Cardiol Intv 2016;9:2320–5.
2. Schymik G, Würth A, Bramlage P, et al. Long-
term results of transapical versus transfemoral
TAVI in a real world population of 1000 patients
with severe symptomatic aortic stenosis. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv 2015;8:e000761.
3. Thourani VH, Jensen HA, Babaliaros V, et al.
Transapical and transaortic transcatheter aortic
valve replacement in the United States. Ann
Thorac Surg 2015;100:1718–26.
4. Debry N, Delhaye C, Azmoun A, et al. Trans-
carotid transcatheter aortic valve replacement:
general or local anesthesia. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv
2016;9:2113–20.
5. Greenbaum AB, Babaliaros VC, Chen MY, et al.
Transcaval Access and Closure for Transcatheter
Aortic Valve Replacement: A Prospective Investi-
gation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;69:511–21.
6. Mylotte D, Sudre A, Teiger E, et al. Transcarotid
transcatheter aortic valve replacement: feasibility
and safety. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv 2016;9:472–80.
7. Petronio AS, De Carlo M, Giannini C, et al.
Subclavian TAVI: more than an alternative access
route. EuroIntervention 2013;9 Suppl:S33–7.
8. Bruschi G, Fratto P, De Marco F, et al. The
trans-subclavian retrograde approach for trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement: single-center
experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2010;140.
911–5, 915.
9. Mathur M, Krishnan SK, Levin D, et al. A step-
by-step guide to fully percutaneous transaxillary
transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Struct
Heart 2017;1:209–15.
10. Vukicevic M, Mosadegh B, Min J, Little S.
Cardiac 3D printing and its future directions. J Am
Coll Cardiol Img 2017;10:171–84.
11. O’Neill
B,
Wang
D,
Pantelic
M.
Trans-
catheter caval valve implantation using multi-
modality imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol Img 2015;
8:221–5.
12. O’Neill B, Wang D, Pantelic M, et al. Reply: the
role of 3D printing in structural heart disease: all
that glitters is not gold. J Am Coll Cardiol Img
2015;8:987–8.
KEY WORDS 3-dimensional model,
alternate access, transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 0
Alasnag et al.
M A R C H 2 0 2 0 : 3 5 2 – 7
3D Model Guiding Structural Interventions
357
