
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE
Surgical Salvage of Annular Rupture After
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation
by Conversion Into Annular Enlargement
Lamees I. El Nihum, MD, MENG,a,b Qasim Al Abri, MD,a Amr Telmesani, MBBS,a Areeba Ali, MD,a Yuncen A. He, MD,a
Tomoya Hinohara, MD,a Manuel Reyes, MD,a Mahesh Ramchandani, MD,a Michael J. Reardon, MDa
ABSTRACT
We describe an 88-year-old woman who experienced annular rupture during transcatheter aortic valve replacement
despite preventative measures. She underwent Y incision and rectangular patch for the double purpose of repairing the
rupture and enlarging the aortic root. We highlight the heart team’s role in confronting this potentially catastrophic
complication. (Level of Difﬁculty: Advanced.) (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2022;4:1529–1533) © 2022 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under
the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 88-year-old woman presented with shortness of
breath with minor activity and New York Heart Asso-
ciation functional class II symptoms. She had a 4/6
harsh systolic ejection murmur at the left sternal
border.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had no signiﬁcant past medical history.
INVESTIGATIONS
Echocardiography
showed
critical
aortic
stenosis
(valve
area:
0.7
cm2)
with
a
mean
gradient
of
91 mm Hg, peak pressure gradient of 76 mm Hg,
and Doppler velocity index of 0.19; the left ven-
tricular ejection fraction was 65%. The transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR) protocol computed
tomography showed a native annulus area-derived
mean
diameter
of
23.1
mm,
annulus
area
of
427
mm2,
left
ventricular
outﬂow
tract
area
of
334 mm2, and a moderately calciﬁed aortic valve
and
minimal
ascending
aortic
calciﬁcation
(Figure 1). Her STS score indicated a risk of mor-
tality of 4.9%.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To describe the diagnosis and management
of annular rupture during transcatheter
aortic valve replacement by a heart team.
 To illustrate use of the Y annuloplasty sur-
gical technique in allowing safe repair of
annular rupture while avoiding full aortic
root replacement.
 To emphasize that prompt and early interven-
tion by an expert surgical team is paramount for
a favorable outcome after annular rupture.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2022.08.014
From the aDeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA; and the bTexas A&M College of
Medicine, Bryan, Texas, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received May 8, 2022; revised manuscript received July 20, 2022, accepted August 4, 2022.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 4 , N O . 2 2 , 2 0 2 2
ª 2 0 2 2 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
MANAGEMENT
The patient was considered high risk for
surgical aortic valve replacement and was
scheduled for TAVR following shared deci-
sion making with the heart team.
In the hybrid operating room, a Sentinel embolic
protection device (Boston Scientiﬁc) via the right
radial artery was placed. Following initial aortogram
(Video 1), preimplant balloon aortic valvuloplasty was
conducted with a 20-mm True Balloon (Bard) and was
well-tolerated (Video 2). A 23-mm Edwards Sapien 3
Ultra valve with nominal ﬁll (Edwards Lifesciences
LLC) was implanted using rapid ventricular pacing at
180 beats/min and pressure-controlled delivery at 6
atm with 5-second inﬂation to minimize the risk of
rupture (Video 3). Positioning was conﬁrmed via
aortic
root
aortography
(Video
4).
Transthoracic
echocardiogram conﬁrmed excellent placement with
no paravalvular leak.
Approximately 5 minutes after valve deployment,
the
patient
developed
severe
hypotension.
New
pericardial effusion was recognized on transthoracic
echocardiogram. Percutaneous pericardial access was
obtained, and a drain was placed. Pericardiocentesis
was performed, and more than 500 mL was taken
FIGURE 1
Calciﬁed Transcatheter Aortic Valve
The transcatheter aortic valve replacement protocol computed tomography showed a moderately calciﬁed aortic valve and minimal ascending
aortic calciﬁcation. LM ¼ left main coronary artery; RCA ¼ right coronary artery; SOV ¼ sinus of Valsalva; STJ ¼ sinotubular junction.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CPB = cardiopulmonary bypass
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
El Nihum et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 2 2 , 2 0 2 2
Annular Rupture After TAVR
N O V E M B E R 1 6 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 5 2 9 – 1 5 3 3
1530

=== PAGE 3 ===
from the pericardium and returned to the femoral
vein. Blood pressure temporarily improved; however,
the pericardial effusion persisted, and the oxygen
saturation of the pericardial blood was systemic. It
was recognized that the likely culprit of pericardial
effusion/cardiac tamponade was arterial bleed from
ventricular
perforation
or
aortic
root
rupture.
The patient was intubated, and a transesophageal
echocardiogram probe was placed. Sternotomy was
performed, and the pericardium was accessed; he-
modynamics improved with release of the remaining
tamponade. The patient was placed on cardiopulmo-
nary bypass (CPB) via central cannulation, and the
heart was decompressed immediately through the
right superior pulmonary vein.
Hematoma and bleeding could be seen at the aortic
root at the noncoronary cusp. After cross clamp, car-
dioplegia, and aortotomy, investigation of the aortic
root revealed a rupture at the base of the noncoronary
sinus where noncoronary cusp calciﬁcation pierced
the annular wall. The transcatheter aortic valve was
explanted, and the native aortic valve was excised
(Figure 2).
The patient was barely sized to a 21-mm valve.
Therefore,
the
incision
was
taken
down
to
and
through the junction of the left and noncoronary
cusps and then diverted to the left coronary cusp to
the nadir below the left main coronary artery. The
annular disruption in the noncoronary cusp was used
as part of the enlargement and, thus, extended until
the membranous septum (Figure 3). A 30-mm Dacron
graft (DuPont) was split longitudinally, and a patch to
match the width of the annular incision was fash-
ioned. This patch was sewn in using 4-0 Prolene
(Ethicon, Inc) along the annular incision and up along
the old annulus and aortic wall to above where the
new valve would sit (Figure 4). The valve was then
sized to 25 mm. A 25-mm Edwards Inspiris valve
(Lifesciences
LLC)
was
placed
without
difﬁculty
(Figure 5).
The 4-0 sutures were then brought up and taken to
the top of the aorta directly anteriorly on both sides.
The graft was cut to ﬁt the remaining opening of the
aorta, and the inferior limb was closed with running
4-0 monoﬁlament. The superior limb was closed with
running 4-0 monoﬁlament (Figure 6). After proper de-
airing, the clamp was removed, and the patient was
weaned
from
CPB.
Postoperative
echocardiogram
showed a well-seated valve with no paravalvular
leak.
The patient was extubated 4 hours after the pro-
cedure and transferred out of the intensive care unit
on postoperative day 1. She was discharged home on
postoperative day 8.
DISCUSSION
Annular rupture refers to injury occurring in the re-
gion of the aortic root and left ventricular outﬂow
tract during TAVR.1 Early recognition and precise
diagnosis of annular rupture are paramount to a
successful outcome. Although treatment approaches
may
include
conservative
therapy
or
pericardial
drainage,
unstable
patients
will
require
surgical
repair. The early initiation of CPB is paramount and
requires efﬁcient coordination among members of the
heart team. This case illustrates the continuing need
for a heart team approach with both interventional
cardiologists and cardiac surgeons actively involved
in the procedure.
Annular rupture with a balloon-expanded valve is
fortunately rare, occurring in about 1% of all TAVR
procedures,
although
subclinical
occurrence
of
FIGURE 2
Subannular Rupture
(A) Investigation of the aortic root revealed a rupture at the base of the noncoronary
sinus where noncoronary cusp calciﬁcation pierced the annular wall. (B) The trans-
catheter aortic valve was explanted, and the native aortic valve was excised.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 2 2 , 2 0 2 2
El Nihum et al
N O V E M B E R 1 6 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 5 2 9 – 1 5 3 3
Annular Rupture After TAVR
1531

=== PAGE 4 ===
rupture renders the true incidence likely higher than
reported.1 Aggressive oversizing of the valve may
increase the risk for rupture but occurs only in the
presence of 1 or more other factors, mainly calciﬁca-
tion.1 Rupture is therefore not necessarily related to
discrepancy between the native annulus size and the
prosthesis.1 Possible risk factors for annular rupture
include small aortic valve annulus; narrow aortic
root; signiﬁcant calciﬁcation in the aortic valve leaf-
lets, even in a large aortic root; calciﬁcation of the
annulus; calcium in the left ventricular outﬂow tract;
calciﬁcation of the sinuses of Valsalva; heavily calci-
ﬁed bicuspid valve; severe asymmetric subaortic left
ventricular hypertrophy; and global left ventricular
hypertrophy in elderly, mostly female patients with
decreased left ventricular compliance.1 In addition,
studies have attempted to identify possible quanti-
tative predictive factors of annular rupture, such as
calcium score beyond the limit of safety or calcium
nodules of more than 4 to 5 mm.1
Our patient demonstrated subannular rupture with
a tear at the base of the noncoronary sinus, likely
caused by balloon overdistension causing the cusp,
containing bulky and calciﬁed material, to press to-
ward the calciﬁed aortic wall during valve deploy-
ment.1 Some have suggested that limiting balloon
expansion to 6 atm may help mitigate the chance of
rupture.2 Although we limited balloon expansion to 6
atm, it was the pattern of calciﬁcation in the non-
coronary cusp that allowed aortic wall perforation.
Techniques for repair of annular rupture include
primary repair, patch annuloplasty, and aortic root
replacement. In this case, the rupture of the base of
the noncoronary cusp would not allow adequate pri-
mary repair. The surgical options were to patch the
entire noncoronary cusp and place a small valve; to
perform a full aortic root replacement; or to use the Y
annuloplasty technique. The Y annuloplasty tech-
nique allowed us to safely repair the rupture while
placing
an
adequately
sized
surgical
valve
and
avoiding a full root replacement.3 We believe that
both of these outcomes were of beneﬁt to our patient,
particularly given the growing agreement that im-
plantation of larger valves allows for improved early
hemodynamic performance and provides a substrate
for potential future valve-in-valve if needed.4-6
FIGURE 3
Annular Enlargement
The incision was taken down to and through the junction of the left and noncoronary
cusps and then diverted to the left coronary cusp to the nadir below the left main
coronary artery. The annular disruption in the noncoronary cusp was used as part of the
enlargement and, thus, extended until the membranous septum. AML ¼ anterior mitral
leaﬂet; LCC ¼ left coronary cusp; NCC ¼ noncoronary cusp.
FIGURE 4
Graft Preparation
A 30-mm synthetic polyester graft was split longitudinally, and
a patch to match the width of the annular incision was
fashioned. This patch was sewn in using 4-0 monoﬁlament
along the annular incision and up along the old annulus and
aortic wall to above where the new valve would sit.
El Nihum et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 2 2 , 2 0 2 2
Annular Rupture After TAVR
N O V E M B E R 1 6 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 5 2 9 – 1 5 3 3
1532

=== PAGE 5 ===
FOLLOW-UP
The patient was doing well at the 2-month follow-up.
Repeat echocardiogram showed good cardiac func-
tion and valve hemodynamics.
CONCLUSIONS
Annular rupture is a rare but serious complication
after TAVR. Identiﬁcation of risk factors during pre-
operative planning is paramount. When free annular
rupture occurs, accurate diagnosis and early conver-
sion for surgical repair by an experienced heart team
are crucial for a favorable outcome.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Reardon is a consultant to Medtronic, Boston Scientiﬁc, and Gore
Medical. Dr Reyes is a consultant for Abbott, Edwards, and CSI. All
other authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Michael J.
Reardon, Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular
Center, 6550 Fannin Street, Smith Tower Suite 1401,
Houston,
Texas
77030,
USA.
E-mail:
mreardon@
houstonmethodist.org. Twitter: @QasimAbri.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Pasic
M,
Unbehaun
A,
Buz
S,
Drews
T,
Hetzer R. Annular rupture during transcatheter
aortic valve replacement: classiﬁcation, patho-
physiology, diagnostics, treatment approaches,
and prevention. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2015;8(1
pt A):1–9.
2. Snir A, Wilson MK, Ju LA, et al. Novel pressure-
regulated deployment strategy for improving the
safety and efﬁcacy of balloon-expandable trans-
catheter aortic valves. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv.
2021;14(22):2503–2515.
3. Yang B, Ghita C, Palmer S. Y-incision aortic root
enlargement with modiﬁed aortotomy upsizing
the annulus by 5 valve sizes. Ann Thorac Surg.
Published online March 26, 2022. https://doi.org/1
0.1016/j.athoracsur.2022.03.013.
4. Pibarot P, Salaun E, Dahou A, et al. Echocar-
diographic results of transcatheter versus surgical
aortic valve replacement in low-risk patients: the
PARTNER 3 Trial. Circulation. 2020;141(19):1527–
1537.
5. Fallon JM, DeSimone JP, Brennan JM, et al. The
incidence and consequence of prosthesis-patient
mismatch after surgical aortic valve replacement.
Ann Thorac Surg. 2018;106(1):14–22.
6. Shih E, DiMaio JM, Squiers JJ, et al. Outcomes
of aortic root enlargement during isolated aortic
valve replacement. J Card Surg. 2022;37(8):2389–
2394.
KEY WORDS annular rupture, root
enlargement, transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
FIGURE 6
Patch
The synthetic polyester graft was cut to ﬁt the remaining
opening of the aorta. The inferior and superior limbs were
closed with running 4-0 monoﬁlament.
FIGURE 5
Valve Implantation
A 25-mm bioprosthetic valve was placed.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 4 , N O . 2 2 , 2 0 2 2
El Nihum et al
N O V E M B E R 1 6 , 2 0 2 2 : 1 5 2 9 – 1 5 3 3
Annular Rupture After TAVR
1533
