
=== PAGE 1 ===
STRUCTURAL HEART DISEASE
CASE REPORT: CLINICAL CASE
Late Migration of a Transcatheter
Heart Valve
Zaid Alirhayim, MD, Dean Kereiakes, MD, Santiago Garcia, MD
ABSTRACT
Migration or embolization of transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) prosthesis is an uncommon (usually
acute) complication. Associated risk factors include malpositioning, pacing miscapture, undersizing, postdilation, and
bicuspid anatomy. Delayed migration is exceedingly rare with little experience reported. The presentation can be
catastrophic, requiring emergency surgery. Herein, we present a case of late TAVR migration managed with repeat
transfemoral TAVR. (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2024;29:102214) © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on
behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 80-year-old man with a history of transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR) presented to our
structural heart disease clinic for a scheduled visit.
One year prior, he had undergone TAVR at our insti-
tution with a 23-mm S3. The postprocedure course
was
signiﬁcant
for
persistent
conduction
distur-
bances,
which
required
implantation
of
a
dual
chamber pacemaker. The patient did well otherwise.
He was asymptomatic and physical examination was
unremarkable. Routine echocardiogram now demon-
strated a mean aortic gradient of 27 mm Hg (increased
from 7 mm Hg, 1 month after the index procedure).
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The past medical history included hypertension, prior
transient-ischemic-attack, and coronary artery dis-
ease with previous percutaneous transluminal coro-
nary angioplasty to a large diagonal branch.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Our main differential diagnoses were hypoattenuated
leaﬂet thickening and early structural valve deterio-
ration. Patient–prosthesis mismatch was felt to be
unlikely because the postprocedure gradients had
been normal.
INVESTIGATIONS
His echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular
ejection
fraction,
restricted
native
aortic
valve
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To formulate a differential diagnosis in the
patient with elevated gradients after TAVR.
 To understand the technical considerations
of redo-TAVR in the stable patient with
migrated TAVR prosthesis.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2023.102214
From the Christ Hospital Physicians, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received September 6, 2023; revised manuscript received December 12, 2023, accepted December 18, 2023.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
ª 2 0 2 4 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
opening with a mean gradient of 27 mm Hg, and a
more ventricular position of the TAVR prosthesis
(Video 1). Review of the index computed tomography
angiography (Figures 1A and 1B) showed an annular
area of 442 mm2, at the margin between 23 and 26 mm
when sized for an S3 valve. Given the smaller left
ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT) dimensions, a 23-mm
S3 had been selected. Notably, index imaging had
shown only mild leaﬂet calciﬁcation, without LVOT or
annular
calciﬁcation.
The
initial
cine-angiogram
(Video 2) demonstrated deployment in a 70/30 posi-
tion, with 70% of the stent frame in the aortic position
and 30% in the LVOT. There had been moderate
paravalvular regurgitation (PVL) (Video 3), which
immediately resolved after postdilation (Video 4)
with an additional 3 mL of volume in the inﬂation
device. Because of the echocardiographic ﬁndings
(Figure 2A), we proceeded with a repeat computed
tomography angiography (Figures 2B to 2G), which
revealed complete retrograde migration of the S3 into
the LVOT, with its outﬂow located 1.5 mm below the
native aortic annular plane. There was no evidence of
hypoattenuated leaﬂet thickening or structural valve
deterioration.
MANAGEMENT
The patient was reviewed by the multidisciplinary
heart team for consideration of surgical explant of the
TAVR prosthesis with SAVR, versus redo TAVR. Given
the patient’s advanced age, lack of signiﬁcant inter-
action with the aortic-mitral curtain by the displaced
transcatheter
heart
valve
(THV)
(mean
mitral
gradient, 4 mm Hg), and increased surgical risk, a
decision was made to proceed with redo TAVR. The
goal of the procedure was to treat the native valve AS
and to prevent further migration of the original
prosthesis. Owing to concerns regarding acute ven-
tricular embolization of the TAVR prosthesis during
the procedure, our cardiothoracic surgeons prepared
a bail-out surgical plan with a primed cardiopulmo-
nary bypass circuit on pump standby. We crossed the
aortic valve with an AL1 diagnostic catheter and a
straight guidewire. Proper positioning of the guide-
wire through the oriﬁce of the THV was conﬁrmed by
rotational angiography (Videos 5A and 5B). The AL1
was exchanged for a pigtail catheter through which a
curved pre-shaped Circulo 0.035-inch wire (Abbott
Vascular) was placed at the LV apex. Balloon pre-
dilatation was not performed. A 26-mm Evolut FX
valve was overlapped with the frame of the previ-
ously implanted S3 (Figures 3A to 3D). Valve function
was
conﬁrmed
by
root
angiography
and
echocardiography
(Videos
5C
and
5D).
The
THV
delivery system was withdrawn and partial reversal
of heparin was achieved with 20 mg of protamine
sulfate. The patient was monitored in the stepdown
unit and discharged home the next day.
FOLLOW-UP
Four months later, the patient remains asymptom-
atic, with stable position of the valves on ﬂuoroscopy.
Recent echocardiography shows a mitral gradient of
6 mm Hg across the aortic valve without PVL.
DISCUSSION
Migration of TAVR prostheses is a rare complication
that
typically
occurs
during
the
intraprocedural
setting or on the ﬁrst day afterward. Late migration
months or years later is exceedingly uncommon, with
only a handful of previously described case reports.1-6
Table 1 lists some of the potential risk factors for acute
or delayed THV migration. Theoretically, migration of
TAVR valves (whether acute or delayed) can occur
when the valve is placed too low in the aortic
annulus, resulting in less anchoring of the THV to the
leaﬂets, which creates leaﬂet overhang that exerts a
continual downward force on the valve.6 The pres-
ence of asymmetric calciﬁcation or bicuspid aortic
anatomy can also be potential contributors, although
neither factor played a role in our patient. We believe
that undersizing in the setting of minimal leaﬂet or
annular calciﬁcation probably contributed to delayed
TAVR migration in our patient. What role postdilation
or stent frame recoil played in this case is unknown.
In retrospect, the capacious sinus dimensions would
have accommodated a larger self-expanding valve
option, such as a 27-mm Navitor (Abbott) or a 29-mm
Evolut (Medtronic). Either choice may have been
more appropriate than the 23-mm S3 used in the in-
dex procedure, especially in a male patient. All things
being equal, one may consider an alternative TAVR
platform when in between sizing parameters on a
speciﬁc valve platform. The next generation SAPIEN
X4 (Edwards Lifesciences) contains features that
might help to address some of the challenges of sizing
THV when the aortic annulus falls between 2 valve
sizes. The reconﬁgured stent frame is designed to
reduce foreshortening and facilitate tailored sizing
with expansion across a wide range of diameters at
0.5-mm increments. Therefore, 3 valves sizes (23 mm,
26 mm, and 29 mm) allow 16 deployment diameters
(21.5-30.0 mm), which could favorably impact para-
valvular regurgitation and mitigate the risk of late
Alirhayim et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 1
CTA Images
(A and B) Index CTA images with annular and LVOT measurements. CTA ¼ computed tomography angiography; LC ¼ left coronary
cusp; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; NC ¼ non coronary cusp; RC ¼ right coronary cusp.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Alirhayim et al
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
FIGURE 2
CTA images
(A) CW Doppler echocardiogram showing increased gradients across the aortic valve. (B to G) Repeat CTA images after S3 migration into the
LVOT below the aortic valve annulus. Abbreviations as in Figure 1.
Continued on the next page
Alirhayim et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
valve migration. The ALLIANCE trial (Safety and
Effectiveness of Balloon-Expandable Bioprosthetic
SAPIEN X4 Transcatheter Heart Valve) is investi-
gating the safety and efﬁcacy of this new iteration of
the SAPIEN valve.
Although a migrated THV can present catastroph-
ically with myocardial ischemia (owing to obstructed
coronary ostia), acute HF, and shock (owing to con-
duction abnormalities, acute aortic regurgitation or
sudden embolization), this case shows that the pre-
sentation can be more subtle, isolated to increased
valve gradients.
The management of delayed THV migration should
consider the clinical condition of the patient, their
anatomical
suitability
for
a
transcatheter
option
(including whether the migrated valve is impinging
on the mitral apparatus), and the associated risks of
each approach. In our literature review of late TAVR
migration, most patients underwent surgical man-
agement. In 1 instance, retrograde migration into the
LVOT occurred 2 years after a valve-in-valve TAVR
with a balloon-expandable valve, with the patient
presenting in cardiogenic shock owing to severe par-
avalvular
aortic
regurgitation
requiring
surgical
intervention.1 In yet another case of delayed retro-
grade migration to the LVOT, the patient underwent
redo TAVR attempt 6 weeks after initial valve im-
plantation, but because the second THV crossed the
ﬁrst implanted valve, “it fell into the left ventricle,”
which warranted immediate surgical intervention.5
As an alternative
to surgery, some
investigators
have suggested that a transapical approach in this
FIGURE 2
Continued
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Alirhayim et al
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
setting may be safer,4,5 arguing that the transapical
approach can mitigate the risks of retrograde wire
crossing of both native and migrated valve with po-
tential further dislocation. Because our patient was
hemodynamically stable, we felt that a redo TAVR
option
through
the
transfemoral
approach
was
feasible with careful and meticulous technique. We
also
felt
that,
with
careful
planning,
a
surgical
approach could still be performed if redo TAVR failed,
with
advanced
priming
of
the
cardiopulmonary
bypass circuit and the presence of a surgical team in
the hybrid operating room.
Several procedural aspects warrant mention. First,
as an added precaution before advancement of the
second THV, we would recommend performing rota-
tional cineangiography to conﬁrm that the guidewire
has crossed through the opening of the previously
implanted valve and not behind its stent frame. The
choice of whether to use a self-expanding or balloon-
expandable valve should be informed by computed
tomography planning, weighing the risks of landing
lower or higher than intended, with resultant aortic
regurgitation through the second THV skirt at the
aortic annulus level. Although either option may have
been possible, we selected a self-expanding valve
instead of a balloon-expandable valve (BEV). If we
had used another BEV for the redo TAVR, we would
have likely selected a second 23-mm S3 to overlap
with the ﬁrst one, which had an average diameter of
21 mm when measured inside the metal frame at the
outﬂow. We were concerned that the intra-annular
design of the BEV would pose a challenge, particu-
larly relating to elevated THV gradients after the
procedure. We, therefore, selected a self-expanding
valve for the redo TAVR with the goal of overlapping
with the S3 frame and pinning its leaﬂets, while
allowing us to achieve lower gradients. In patients
who are unstable, those with a low surgical risk, or
FIGURE 2
Continued
Alirhayim et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
FIGURE 2
Continued
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Alirhayim et al
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
those
with
signiﬁcant
interaction
with
the
mitral valve leaﬂets, a surgical approach is likely
preferable.
CONCLUSIONS
Delayed TAVR prosthesis migration is an uncommon
clinical scenario. Its management is often risky and
complex, usually requiring surgery. Redo TAVR is a
feasible option in selected cases, subject to careful
planning and a thoughtful approach.
FIGURE 3
Redo TAVR
(A to D) Redo TAVR, deployment steps in sequence. TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
TABLE 1
Factors That May Contribute to Retrograde TAVR
Migration
Undersizing
Suboptimal valve expansion
Prosthesis malpositioning (low implantation)
Functional or anatomical bicuspid valve
Postdilation of the valve
Uneven or insufﬁcient aortic annulus calciﬁcation leading to
inadequate prosthesis ﬁxation,
Aortic paravalvular regurgitation
TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
Alirhayim et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Drs Garcia and Kereiakes has received institutional research grants
from the Lindner Center as well as industry support from Edwards
Lifesciences. Dr Alirhayim has reported that he has no relationships
relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Zaid
Alirhayim,
The
Christ
Hospital
Physicians,
2139
Auburn Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45219, USA. E-mail:
zalirhayim@gmail.com. @ZaidFSCAI, @djkereiakes.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Hale SM, Jessen M, Banerjee S, Kumbhani DJ.
Successful transcatheter treatment for very late
migration of a transcatheter aortic valve into the
left ventricular outﬂow tract. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv.
2021;97:1492–1495.
https://doi.org/10.
1002/ccd.29547
2. Menezes MN, Silva PCD, Nobre Â, et al. Sub-
acute
retrograde
TAVI
migration
successfully
treated with a valve-in-valve procedure. Revista
Española de Cardiología (English Edition). 2017;70:
508–510.
3. Tobolski J, Powers J, Afari M, et al. Delayed
apical migration of transcatheter heart valve with
resultant severe aortic insufﬁciency. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2021;77(18 Suppl_1):1897.
4. Lauten A, Hamadanchi A, Doenst T, Figulla HR.
Late
migration
of
balloon-expandable
trans-
catheter aortic valve. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:2509.
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/eht204
5. Koizumi S, Ehara N, Nishiya K, et al. A case of
SAPIEN XT valve fallen into left ventricle during
valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve implan-
tation. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;66:291–
293. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11748-017-0791-z
6. Rheude T, Pellegrini C, Michel J, et al. Late
migration of Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter
heart
valves:
mechanisms
and
transcatheter
treatment options for a rare phenomenon. Clin Res
Cardiol. 2018;107:1183–1186. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00392-018-1301-8
KEY WORDS aortic stenosis, device
migration, TAVR
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Alirhayim et al
F E B R U A R Y 2 1 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 1 4
Late Migration of a Transcatheter Heart Valve
9
