
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
ICE-Guided False Lumen Occlusion 
Following Combined TAVR and TEVAR
Yusuke Kobari, MD, PHD, a Yinghao Lim, MD, a Arif A. Khokhar, BM, BCH, MA, a Yannick Willemen, MD, PHD, a 
Timothy Andrew Resch, MD, PHD, b,c Ole De Backer, MD, PHD, a,d Gintautas Bieliauskas, MD a
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Concomitant severe aortic stenosis and descending aortic pathology pose unique challenges for 
transcatheter treatment strategies.
CASE SUMMARY A 75-year-old man with end-stage renal disease and chronic descending aortic dissection presented 
with symptomatic severe aortic stenosis. Preprocedural imaging revealed a heavily calcified aortic valve and a large 
thoracic aortic aneurysm with dissection. He underwent successful transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve replacement 
using a 65-cm-long DrySeal sheath, immediately followed by thoracic endovascular aortic repair. Two weeks later, 
residual false lumen perfusion was treated with a custom-made false lumen occluder under intracardiac echocardiog-
raphy guidance. The patient recovered uneventfully.
DISCUSSION This case illustrates the feasibility and potential advantages of simultaneous transfemoral transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement and thoracic endovascular aortic repair in the setting of complex aortic pathology. It also 
underscores the emerging and pivotal role of intracardiac echocardiography in guiding endovascular interventions. 
Such combined strategies may help minimize access-related complications and contribute to favorable clinical 
outcomes. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105930) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 75-year-old man was referred to our institution 
with exertional dyspnea classified as NYHA func-
tional class III. No signs of peripheral edema or overt 
heart failure were noted.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a history of arterial hypertension, 
diabetes mellitus, and glomerular nephropathy 
requiring 
hemodialysis 
(estimated 
glomerular
filtration rate: 8 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ). He also had a 
known chronic descending thoracic aortic dissection 
under regular surveillance.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In a hemodialysis-dependent patient with progres-
sive exertional dyspnea, differential diagnoses 
included heart failure with preserved ejection frac-
tion, valvular heart disease (particularly aortic ste-
nosis), and anemia of chronic disease.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105930
From the a The Heart Center, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; b The Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; c The Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, 
Denmark; and the d Institute of Clinical Medicine, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received June 16, 2025; revised manuscript received July 31, 2025, accepted August 5, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
INVESTIGATIONS
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed 
concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with 
preserved ejection fraction (60%), and a 
mixed valvular lesion consisting of severe 
aortic stenosis and moderate aortic regurgi-
tation (Videos 1 and 2). Contrast-enhanced 
computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a 
heavily calcified tricuspid aortic valve with 
an annular area of 490 mm 2 , large dimensions of the 
sinus of Valsalva, and a horizontal aorta (64 ◦ ). A 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysm (maximum 
diameter: 63 mm) with a chronic dissection and a 
primary entry tear in the thoracic segment was also 
noted (Figure 1). Hence, the patient fulfilled clinical 
indications for aortic valve replacement and aortic 
repair. After a heart team discussion, it was decided 
to offer the patient transfemoral transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement (TAVR) treatment with concomi-
tant thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) 
under general anesthesia.
MANAGEMENT
TAVR PROCEDURE. Due to severe tortuosity of the 
left femoral artery, the right femoral artery was 
chosen for primary access. The puncture site in the 
right common femoral artery was preclosed using a 
ProStyle device (Abbott), which was followed by 
insertion of an 8-F sheath. A hydrophilic guidewire 
and 5-F JR4.0 catheter were used to navigate through 
the true lumen, which was also confirmed by contrast 
injection. Next, a 65-cm-long 20-F DrySeal Flex 
Introducer sheath (W.L. Gore Inc) was inserted over a 
Lunderquist Extra Stiff double-curved guidewire— 
thereby bypassing the descending aortic aneurysm 
and dissection—and an Evolut FX+ 29 mm (Med-
tronic) transcatheter heart valve was delivered and 
successfully 
implanted 
through 
this 
sheath 
(Figure 2).
TEVAR PROCEDURE. Using the same femoral access 
after TAVR, 2 covered TEVAR stent grafts (Zenith 
Alpha Thoracic 36 × 209 mm and Zenith Alpha 
Thoracic 38 × 217 mm; Cook Medical) were deployed 
between the left subclavian artery and the celiac 
trunk (Figure 2). Final angiography confirmed suc-
cessful occlusion of the dissection entry site at the 
proximal segment of the descending aorta. Hemo-
stasis at the main access was achieved with a com-
bined 
ProStyle and 
8-F 
AngioSeal 
(Terumo) 
technique. The total procedure time for the com-
bined TAVR and TEVAR procedures was 66 minutes 
(fluoroscopic time: 32 minutes), with only 68 mL of
contrast dye used. The postprocedural transthoracic 
echocardiogram demonstrated a well-functioning 
transcatheter heart valve with mild paravalvular 
leakage (Videos 3 and 4). The patient was discharged 
the following day in good clinical condition.
FALSE LUMEN OCCLUSION UNDER INTRACARDIAC 
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY GUIDANCE. Two weeks later,
the patient presented with new-onset chest pain. 
electrocardiogram was completely normal, and 
transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a 
well-functioning Evolut transcatheter heart valve 
with normal left ventricular ejection fraction. 
A repeat CT scan revealed remaining perfusion of the 
false lumen in the thoracic part of the descending 
aorta and slight enlargement of aortic diameters in 
the same segment. A custom-made false lumen 
occluder (Candy plug 46 mm; Cook Medical) was 
chosen to exclude the false lumen and prevent 
further growth of the descending aortic aneurysm. 
The right iliofemoral axis was again chosen for the 
primary access. Access to the false lumen was needed 
to deliver the false lumen occluder. However, it was 
difficult to identify dissection reentry sites within the 
abdominal aorta. Hence, a ViewFlex Xtra intracardiac 
echocardiography (ICE) catheter (St Jude Medical) 
was placed in the inferior vena cava for additional 
imaging (Figure 3). ICE provided clear visualization of 
the abdominal aorta and helped to identify a dissec-
tion reentry site, allowing accurate wire crossing into 
the false lumen, which was confirmed by contrast 
injection. The false lumen occlude device—also called 
candy plug—was deployed adjacent to the distal part 
of the previously placed TEVAR stent graft; this was 
to prevent backflow and promote thrombosis in the 
false lumen. The total procedure time was 62 minutes 
(fluoroscopic time: 19 minutes).
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP. The patient was dis-
charged the following day without complications. 
Three months after the procedure, the patient does
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Descending aortic aneurysm and/or dissec-
tion should not preclude transfemoral TAVR, 
when appropriate access strategies are 
planned, and a simultaneous TAVR and 
TEVAR approach may be preferable to a 
staged approach to minimize access-related 
complications and reduce aneurysm rupture 
risk.
• ICE enhances procedural precision and 
facilitates correct wire navigation in 
challenging aortic dissection cases.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
ICE = intracardiac
echocardiography
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEVAR = thoracic
endovascular aortic repair
Kobari et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR, TEVAR, and Candy Plug Technique 
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 3 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 1 Case Presentation With Procedural Planning and Execution
Preprocedural CT showed a calcified, tricuspid aortic valve and an extensive thoracic aortic aneurysm with a dissection starting just distal to 
the left subclavian artery and extending to the terminal abdominal aorta. A procedural strategy for concomitant TAVR and TEVAR treatment 
was made; this needed to be supplemented with a transcatheter occlusion of a persistent false lumen a few weeks later. AS = aortic stenosis; 
CT = computed tomography; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement; TEVAR = thoracic endovascular aortic repair.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Kobari et al
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 3 0 
TAVR, TEVAR, and Candy Plug Technique
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
FIGURE 2 Procedural Details of the Concomitant TAVR-TEVAR Procedure
Step 1: TAVR procedure: (A) a 65 cm-long Gore DrySeal Flex introducer sheath was introduced bypassing the thoracic aortic dissection. (B) An 
Evolut FX + valve (29 mm) was delivered through the sheath and (C and D) successfully implanted without paravalvular leak. Step 2: TEVAR 
procedure: (E) the proximal TEVAR stent graft was deployed just distal to the left subclavian artery, followed by deployment of a second 
stent graft. (F) Postdilatation of the stent grafts was performed at the overlap zone. (G) Final TEVAR result with exclusion of the primary 
entry tear within the dissected thoracic aorta. THV = transcatheter heart valve; other abbreviations as in Figure 1.
Kobari et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR, TEVAR, and Candy Plug Technique 
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 3 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
not have any relevant symptoms. The follow-up CT is 
planned 6 months after the procedure.
DISCUSSION
Coexistence of severe aortic stenosis and pathology 
in the descending aorta—such as aortic aneurysm 
and/or dissection—is not uncommon. Although no 
clear recommendations are provided in current 
guidelines regarding the mode and timing of treat-
ment of such concomitant diseases, this case report 
nicely demonstrates that both pathologies can be 
elegantly treated concomitantly using transcatheter 
techniques.
Transfemoral TAVR in cases with aortic disease 
may (seem to) be more challenging due to a higher
risk of vascular complications, and some operators 
may be willing to choose an alternative access for 
TAVR. However, as illustrated in this case report, 
the presence of an abdominal or thoracic aneurysm 
or dissection should not be prohibitive for a trans-
femoral TAVR approach, with appropriate planning 
and access management. The use of long introducer 
sheaths, such as the 65-cm-long DrySeal sheath, is 
instrumental in this.
Whether a concomitant or staged approach for 
TAVR and TEVAR/endovascular aneurysm repair 
should be chosen can be debated. 1 A concomitant 
TAVR and TEVAR approach is often feasible and may 
even be more preferable than a staged strategy. 
Performing both procedures concomitantly can 
minimize access-related vascular complications and
FIGURE 3 ICE-Guided Transcatheter Closure of Residual False Lumen
(A) ICE imaging provided clear visualization of the reentry tear site, allowing accurate wire crossing into the false lumen, which was 
confirmed by contrast injection. (B and C) A false lumen occluder was deployed adjacent to the TEVAR stent graft. ICE = intracardiac 
echocardiography; TEVAR = thoracic endovascular aortic repair.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Kobari et al
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 3 0 
TAVR, TEVAR, and Candy Plug Technique
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
may reduce the risk of aneurysm rupture caused by 
post-TAVR fluctuations in blood pressure. 1 This case 
supports the feasibility and safety of a concomitant 
approach in well-selected patients. However, the 
choice between a staged vs concomitant strategy 
should be guided by individual patient characteris-
tics, and further research is needed to refine the 
decision-making algorithm for this complex clinical 
scenario. Although combined TAVR and TEVAR pro-
cedures are typically associated with increased 
contrast use and concerns regarding contrast-
induced nephropathy, this was not a limitation in 
our case because the patient had preexisting end-
stage renal disease requiring chronic hemodialysis. 
False lumen occluders are sometimes used in pa-
tients with chronic type B aortic dissection after 
TEVAR to stop continued blood flow in the false 
lumen. This residual flow often comes from distal 
entry tears in the abdominal aorta or iliac arteries. 
The technique was originally known as the candy 
plug technique, which involved modifying a thoracic 
stent graft into a candy-shaped plug by adding a 
diameter-restricting suture in the middle of the stent 
graft. Today, custom-made false lumen occluders are 
available, making the procedure simpler and more 
standardized. In our case, visualization of the 
dissection membrane within the abdominal aorta was 
achieved by placing the ICE catheter within the 
inferior vena cava. ICE provided real-time intravas-
cular imaging, allowing wire navigation into the false 
lumen and subsequent successful delivery of the
false lumen occluder. This case highlights the 
growing utility of ICE in guiding endovascular in-
terventions such as TAVR and TEVAR. 2 ICE offers 
high-resolution imaging and color Doppler flow 
assessment, which can be particularly valuable in 
complex anatomies, as demonstrated here. Scherer 
et al 3 also reported a case of ascending aorta pseu-
doaneurysm repair using intra-aortic 3-dimensional 
ICE guidance, further supporting the versatility of 
ICE. The role of ICE in complex structural and 
endovascular procedures is expected to expand. 4
CONCLUSIONS
This case highlights the feasibility of simultaneous 
transfemoral TAVR and TEVAR, emphasizing the 
importance of having endovascular skills in struc-
tural heart teams. Furthermore, ICE offers a novel 
approach for guiding complex aortic procedures, 
such as endovascular aortic repair.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Resch is a consultant for COOK Medical and Gore Medical, and has 
received a research grant from Medtronic. All other authors have 
reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of 
this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Yusuke
Kobari, The Heart Center, Rigshospitalet, University 
of Copenhagen, Inge Lehmanns Vej 7, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. 
E-mail: 
yusuke.doradora@gmail.com. 
X handle: @yusuke_kobari.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Gallitto E, Spath P, Faggiolia GL, et al. 
Simultaneous versus staged approach in 
transcatheter 
aortic 
valve 
implantation 
for severe stenosis and endovascular aortic 
repair for thoracic and abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2024;66: 
ezae379.
2. Tang GHL, Zaid S, Hahn RT, et al. Structural 
heart imaging using 3-Dimensional intracardiac 
echocardiography: JACC Cardiovasc Imaging
position statement. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2025;18(1):93–115.
3. Scherer E, Kerwin A, Schwartz J, Scherer M. 
Novel use of intra-aortic 3D ICE to guide 
ascending aorta pseudoaneurysm repair. JACC 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2025;18(6):811–812.
4. Hahn RT, Little SH, Monaghan MJ, et al. 
Recommendations for comprehensive intra-
procedural echocardiographic imaging during
TAVR. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;8(3):261– 
287.
KEY WORDS aortic dissection, aortic 
stenosis, thoracic endovascular aneurysm 
repair, transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Kobari et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
TAVR, TEVAR, and Candy Plug Technique 
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 3 0
6
