
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Successful Emergency Transcatheter
Aortic Valve Replacement for
Severe Aortic Regurgitation in
Takayasu’s Arteritis
Takanori Kawamoto, MD, PHD,a Hisao Otsuki, MD, PHD,a Masataka Hirota, MD,b Masafumi Yoshikawa, MD, PHD,a
Eiji Shibahashi, MD, PHD,a Yusuke Inagaki, MD, PHD,a Tomohito Kogure, MD, PHD,a Satoru Domoto, MD, PHD,b
Hiroshi Ninami, MD, PHD,b Junichi Yamaguchi, MD, PHDa
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Takayasu’s arteritis (TA) is a rare inﬂammatory disease that often causes aortic regurgitation (AR).
However, severe arterial degeneration sometimes complicates surgical intervention.
CASE SUMMARY A 62-year-old woman with TA developed refractory heart failure due to severe noncalciﬁed AR.
Surgery was not feasible because of the extreme calciﬁcation of the aorta. Emergency transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (TAVR) using a Sapien 3 Ultra RESILIA valve (Edwards Lifesciences) was performed. Subsequently, the heart
failure improved substantially.
DISCUSSION Severe arterial degeneration makes surgical intervention difﬁcult for TA. When performing TAVR for
noncalciﬁed AR, careful selection of the prosthetic valve and deployment technique is crucial.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE A meticulous strategy is needed to safely perform TAVR with the currently available off-label
prosthetic valves for cases of TA complicated by noncalciﬁed AR that are difﬁcult to manage with open-heart
surgery. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103913) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College
of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 62-year-old woman presented to the emergency
department with progressive dyspnea and orthopnea.
Her blood pressure was elevated (156/52 mm Hg) with
a wide pulse pressure. She also presented with
tachycardia
with
a
heart
rate
of
109
beats/min,
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE
 A meticulous strategy is needed to safely
perform TAVR with the currently available
off-label prosthetic valves for cases of TA
complicated by noncalciﬁed AR that are
difﬁcult to manage with open-heart surgery.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103913
From the aDepartment of Cardiology, Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan; and the bDepartment of Cardiovascular
Surgery, Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received January 29, 2025; accepted February 5, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
tachypnea
with
a
respiratory
rate
of
24
breaths/min, and an oxygen saturation of
90% without oxygen. She exhibited a dia-
stolic heart murmur, wheezing in both lungs,
and pitting edema in the legs without fever.
Her body weight was 48.6 kg (same as that at
the last discharge).
MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient was diagnosed with Takayasu’s
arteritis (TA) at 40 years of age. Steroid therapy was
initiated, and the dosage was tapered as the disease
stabilized. On admission, she was administered 5 mg
of prednisolone. She was diagnosed with severe
aortic regurgitation (AR) at 50 years of age. However,
the patient did not experience heart failure or signs of
left
ventricular
dilatation
or
dysfunction.
Two
months before admission, her renal dysfunction due
to nephrosclerosis had progressed, and maintenance
dialysis therapy was initiated through a left forearm
arteriovenous shunt. She also had hypertension and
was taking oral telmisartan 20 mg and nifedipine
controlled-release 40 mg.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The most likely diagnosis was heart failure. Possible
causes
included
increased
cardiac
load
due
to
AR,
decreased
cardiac
function
associated
with
coronary
artery
disease,
arrhythmia,
afterload
mismatch due to poor hypertension management,
and inadequate ﬂuid management during dialysis.
Additionally, pneumonia and bronchitis were also
considered.
INVESTIGATIONS
Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm with ST-
segment depression and negative T waves in leads I,
II, aVF, and V5
-V6, a heart rate of 105 beats/min, and
ST-segment elevation in V1-V3 leads. Compared with
her previous electrocardiogram, ST depression and
negative T waves became more pronounced (Figure 1).
Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly and pulmonary
edema. Laboratory tests showed normal values for
blood
count,
C-reactive
protein,
and
erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, high creatinine levels (8.4 mg/
dL), high Troponin I levels (410 ng/mL), and elevated
brain natriuretic peptide levels (5,237 pg/mL). Trans-
thoracic echocardiography showed severe AR without
calciﬁcation
on
the
valve,
no
asynergy
of
left
ventricle wall motion, and dilatation of the left
ventricle (62 mm at end-diastole and 51 mm at end-
systole) with left ventricular hypertrophy. The left
ventricular
ejection
fraction
(LVEF)
was
46%
(Figure
2,
Videos
1
to
3).
Coronary
angiography
revealed no evidence of coronary artery disease.
Computed
tomography
revealed
circumferential
VISUAL SUMMARY
Clinical Course and Therapeutic Interventions
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AR = aortic regurgitation
LVEF = left ventricular ejection
fraction
TA = Takayasu’s arteritis
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TVEM = transcatheter valve
embolization or migration
Kawamoto et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 1
Electrocardiographic Findings
(A) Electrocardiographic ﬁndings during hospitalization 3 weeks prior. ST-segment depression and negative T waves in leads I, II, aVF, and V5-V6 and ST-segment
elevation in leads V1-V3 were recognized. (B) T-wave inversion becomes more pronounced.
FIGURE 2
Transthoracic Echocardiography Findings in the Diastolic Phase
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed severe aortic regurgitation (AR) without calciﬁcation of the aortic valve. (A) Parasternal long-axis view of the left ventricle.
A broad AR jet was observed (70% regurgitation width ratio, 8 mm vena contracta). (B) Short-axis view at the aortic valve level. Calciﬁcation was not observed in the
valve cusps. Regurgitation was performed at the center of the aortic valve. (C) Apical 3-chamber view. The AR jet reaches the left ventricular apex.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Kawamoto et al
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
calciﬁcation of the ascending aorta extending to the
descending aorta without lumen narrowing (Figure 3)
and the absence of organic abnormalities in the lungs.
The activity was conﬁrmed to be low based on ﬂuo-
rodeoxyglucose
positron
emission
tomography-
computed tomography (Figure 4).
MANAGEMENT
Since she had started dialysis 2 months prior, ﬂuid
control
was
titrated
by
dialysis.
Orthopnea
dis-
appeared after decreasing the dry weight from 48.0
to 47.0 kg. The right heart catheter revealed no
volume overload at a weight of 47.0 kg (8 mm Hg of
mean right atrial pressure, 26 mm Hg; mean pul-
monary artery pressure, 19 mm Hg; mean pulmo-
nary capillary wedge pressure and cardiac index,
2.9). However, even after decreasing the dry weight
to
46.8
kg,
dyspnea
on
exertion
persisted,
and
pulmonary
congestion
on
radiography
worsened.
Further
attempts
at
ﬂuid
removal
led
to
hypotension (90 mm Hg of systolic peripheral blood
pressure), and heart failure worsened, requiring the
administration of dobutamine at 3 g, respiratory
assistance
with
bilevel
positive
airway
pressure
treatment,
and
implementation
of
continuous
hemodiaﬁltration. Subsequently, LVEF decreased to
34% (Videos 4 to 6).
This case was discussed by our team. Although
severe AR is considered the primary cause of heart
failure, surgery for AR is challenging because of se-
vere calciﬁcation of the aorta and the high risk of
complications (Society of Thoracic Surgery score for
mortality,
11.6%).
Therefore,
we
proceeded
with
emergency transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (TAVR). Preoperative computed tomog-
raphy revealed an aortic annular area of 514 mm2
without any calciﬁcation; no stenosis or calciﬁcation
was observed in the left ventricular outﬂow tract
(Figure
5).
Transfemoral
TAVR
with
a
balloon-
expandable valve (Sapien 3 Ultra RESILLIA [S3UR],
29 mm; Edwards Lifesciences) was performed with
FIGURE 3
CT Findings
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed severe circumferential calciﬁcation from the ascending aorta to the descending and abdominal aorta. In
contrast, few calciﬁcations were observed in the aortic valves. Cross-section of the aortic arch (A; red line in images 1 and 2), the ascending aorta (B; blue line in images
1 and 2), the aortic valve and thoracic descending aorta (C; orange line in images 1 and 2), the suprarenal aorta (D; green line in images 1 and 2), and the infrarenal aorta
(E; purple line in images 1 and 2). (1) Three-dimensional CT angiography from the frontal view. (2) Three-dimensional CT angiography from the left lateral view.
Kawamoto et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
the patient under general anesthesia with intubation.
During the procedure, the right radial arterial systolic
pressure was approximately 100 mm Hg, the aortic
systolic pressure exceeded 200 mm Hg, and the left
ventricular end-diastolic pressure was 36 mm Hg.
Aortography revealed stenosis of the right brachio-
cephalic artery, which was believed to have caused a
discrepancy between the aortic and peripheral blood
pressure (Figure 6). Valve deployment was performed
in a slightly lower position with single full inﬂation
under respiratory arrest and rapid pacing to ensure
accurate positioning. The devices used during the
procedure are listed in Table 1. After deployment,
aortography and transesophageal echocardiography
conﬁrmed the disappearance of AR, and there was no
paravalvular leakage (Figure 7, Videos 7 and 8). After
waiting for 30 minutes, no displacement of the pros-
thetic valve was observed, and the procedure was
concluded.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
After the procedure, AR disappeared, and dobut-
amine
administration,
respiratory
support,
and
continuous hemodiaﬁltration were no longer needed.
Four days after the procedure, sustained ventricular
tachycardia was induced by the R-on-T phenomenon
due to premature ventricular contraction. A dual-
chamber implantable cardioverter-deﬁbrillator was
implanted
for
the
secondary
prevention
of
fatal
arrhythmia. After hemodynamic stabilization, pul-
monary congestion on the radiograph disappeared
and dyspnea subsided. Gradually, LVEF improved,
lower limb blood pressure measurements indicated
the absence of hypotension, and then antihyperten-
sive medication was resumed. Three weeks after the
procedure, her condition improved, and she was
discharged ambulatory. One month later, the T-wave
changes
on
the
electrocardiogram
improved.
FIGURE 4
FDG Positron Emission Tomography-Computed Tomography Findings
FDG positron emission tomography-computed tomography revealed little active inﬂammation in the systemic artery. (A and B) No FDG uptake
was observed in the ascending aorta, aortic arch, or descending aorta. (C) Only physiological FDG uptake was observed throughout the body.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Kawamoto et al
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FIGURE 5
Computed Tomography Analysis for TAVR
Computed tomography ﬁt analysis for transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) showed 514.5 mm2 of aortic valve annulus area without calciﬁcation and 81.4 mm
of aortic valve annulus perimeter. No stenosis or calciﬁcation was observed in the left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT). No calciﬁcation was observed in the aortic
valve, and the sinotubular junction (STJ) was dilated. With regard to access from the femoral artery, although both common iliac arteries showed calciﬁcation, the lumen
area was sufﬁcient for TAVR. (A) Cross-section of the STJ (red line in images 1 and 2). (B) Cross-section of the Valsalva sinus (yellow line in images 1 and 2). (C) Cross-
section of the aortic valve annulus (purple line in images 1 and 2). (D) Cross-section of the LVOT (green line in images 1 and 2). (1) Sagittal view of the left ventricle.
(2) Coronal view of the left ventricle. (3) Access analysis images from the femoral artery to the aorta.
FIGURE 6
Intraprocedural Monitoring Image and Angiography
(A) Intraprocedural monitoring image showing systolic central aortic pressure of 203 mm Hg (yellow) and systolic right radial artery pressure of 117 mm Hg (red).
(B) Angiography showing right brachiocephalic artery stenosis. This is believed to be partially involved in the systolic arterial pressure gradient. HR ¼ heart rate;
s/d/m ¼ systolic/diastolic/mean arterial blood pressure; SpO2 ¼ oxygen saturation.
Kawamoto et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Transthoracic echocardiography conﬁrmed that the
AR
remained
at
0
and
LVEF
improved
to
61%
(Figure 8, Videos 9 and 10).
DISCUSSION
TA
is
a
rare
inﬂammatory
disease
that
causes
inﬂammation in systemic arteries. The most common
presentation of TA is symptoms resulting from arte-
rial occlusive disease. Nearly 40% of patients with TA
develop cardiac abnormalities induced by arterial
degeneration, and cardiac comorbidities are the pri-
mary causes of death in patients with TA.1
Surgical treatment of AR in TA can yield favorable
outcomes.2 However, if the inﬂammation is poorly
controlled, there is a risk of complications.3 In this
case, although inﬂammation was suppressed, aortic
calciﬁcation was severe, making open-heart surgery
difﬁcult because of the impossibility of using circu-
latory assist devices and suturing the prosthetic
valve.
TAVR is an effective and safe treatment option for
severe aortic valve stenosis.4 However, TAVR with
the currently available valves for pure native AR is
associated with a high risk of transcatheter valve
embolization or migration (TVEM) because of the
absence of annular and leaﬂet calciﬁcation.5 Ruggiero
FIGURE 7
Intraprocedural Findings of Radiography and Transesophageal Echocardiography
(a) Severe aortic regurgitation (AR) was observed before the procedure. (A) The S3UR was positioned slightly toward the left ventricular outﬂow tract, just beyond the
aortic annulus. (B) The S3UR was deployed with a single full inﬂation under respiratory arrest and rapid pacing to ensure accurate positioning of the annulus. (b) After
deploying the S3UR, AR was suppressed. (C and c) After waiting for 30 minutes after valve placement, no valve displacement or regurgitation, including the paravalvular
leak, was observed.
TABLE 1
Equipment List or Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Replacement
Imaging

Transesophageal echocardiogram (X7-2t transesophageal
echocardiogram probe; Philips Healthcare iE33)
Access

Ultrasound machine (Philips Healthcare iE33)

Puncture needle and wire

8.0-F sheath

6.0-F sheath

5.0-F sheath

4.0-F sheath

Perclose ProStyle (Abbot Vascular)

0.035 angle wire (Terumo)
For aortic valve intervention

0.035 straight wire (Terumo)

5-F Amplatz left catheter (Technowood)

4.2-F pigtail catheter (NIPRO)

6-F pigtail catheter (Terumo)

SAFARl2 Guidewire Extra Small Curve (Boston Scientiﬁc)

Temporary external pacemaker (6-F pacemaker catheter;
Biotronik)
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement device

Sapien 3 Ultra RESILLIA 29 mm (e-sheath þ introducer system;
Edwards Lifesciences)
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Kawamoto et al
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
et al6 reported a case of TAVR for pure native AR in a
patient with TA, necessitating the use of 2 self-
expandable valves because of TVEM. In contrast,
TAVR for native pure AR with newer-generation
prosthetic valves is associated with a lower risk of
complications
and
acceptable
postoperative
out-
comes despite it being off-label.7 In cases of pure
native AR, the aortic valve exhibits less sclerosis and
calciﬁcation, making it more ﬂexible and extensible
than
in
calciﬁed
cases
of
aortic
valve
stenosis.
Therefore, an oversized prosthetic valve that is larger
than that in the existing device size charts might be
beneﬁcial.8
The S3UR is a balloon-expandable valve of a ﬁfth-
generation device with better sealing properties and
effective reduction of paravalvular leaks because of
its enhanced expansion capabilities and improved
outer skirt.9 Therefore, we considered that S3UR
could achieve good sealing and reduce the risk of
TVEM, even in cases of pure native AR with minimal
calciﬁcation. Because the left ventricular outﬂow
tract area was equal to the aortic annular area and the
ascending aorta was dilated, it was considered safe to
deploy the valve at a slightly lower position to in-
crease the adhesion area with full inﬂation. Although
a 26-mm valve is recommended according to the
standard sizing chart, a 29-mm valve was selected for
reliable valve sealing (oversizing rate of 26%). To
prevent TVEM, the valve was deployed with a single
expansion without postdilatation. TAVR for native AR
is considered a viable option to improve the condition
of TA cases where vascular degeneration limits the
choice of open-heart surgery. However, the incidence
of TVEM has been reported to be quite high (15%-
20%).5,8
Therefore,
the
practical
application
of
catheter-based valves speciﬁcally developed for AR is
expected
to
ensure
safer
and
more
reliable
procedures.
Vascular disease progression in the TA sometimes
leads to inaccurate blood pressure readings.10 In the
present case, blood pressure was measured in the
right arm after the initiation of hemodialysis despite a
huge
pressure
gradient
with
the
central
arterial
pressure because of the left forearm arteriovenous
shunt. After intensiﬁed ultraﬁltration, blood pressure
in the right arm decreased, leading to the discontin-
uation of antihypertensive agents (azilsartan 20 mg,
nifedipine CR 40 mg, which subsequently resulted in
further afterload mismatch; this likely led to gradual
worsening of pulmonary congestion on radiography
FIGURE 8
Findings From Follow-Up Electrocardiography and Transthoracic Echocardiography 1 Month Postoperatively
(1) The T-wave changes on the electrocardiography improved. (A to C) Transthoracic echocardiography conﬁrmed the absence of aortic regurgitation.
Kawamoto et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
and a rapid decline in LVEF over a short period.
Inappropriate central hypertension based on blood
pressure readings from the right arm and excessive
ﬂuid management based on x-ray ﬁndings were
believed
to
have
induced
low-output
syndrome,
exacerbating heart failure symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS
TAVR can be a treatment option for native pure
AR in TA
cases in which open-heart surgery is
challenging
because
of
vascular
degeneration.
The
preoperative
treatment
strategy
is
of
the
utmost importance.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Hisao Otsuki, MD,
PhD, Department of Cardiology, Tokyo Women’s Medical
University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-
8666, Japan. E-mail: h.otsuki0107@gmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Gornik HL, Creager MA. Aortitis. Circulation.
2008;117:3039–3051.
2. Ergi DG, Schaff HV, Pochettino A, et al. Out-
comes of aortic surgery in patients with Takayasu
arteritis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2024;169:576–
583.
3. Matsuura K, Ogino H, Kobayashi J, et al. Surgical
treatment of aortic regurgitation due to Takayasu
arteritis: long-term morbidity and mortality. Cir-
culation. 2005;112:3707–3712.
4. Mack MJ, Leon MB, Smith CR, et al. 5-year
outcomes of transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment or surgical aortic valve replacement for high
surgical risk patients with aortic stenosis (PART-
NER 1): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2015;385:2477–2484.
5. Poletti E, De Backer O, Scotti A, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement for pure native
aortic valve regurgitation: the PANTHEON inter-
national project. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2023;16:
1974–1985.
6. Ruggiero R, Ponticelli F, Giannini F, Galvani M.
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation for severe
pure aortic regurgitation due to active aortitis.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2021;97:950–954.
7. De Backer O, Pilgrim T, Simonato M, et al.
Usefulness of transcatheter aortic valve implan-
tation for treatment of pure native aortic valve
regurgitation. Am J Cardiol. 2018;122:1028–1035.
8. Le Ruz R, Plessis J, Guimbretiere G, et al. Sapien
3 embolization from ventricle to aorta in the
setting of noncalciﬁed aortic regurgitation. JACC
Case Rep. 2021;3:64–68.
9. Stinis CT, Abbas AE, Teirstein P, et al. Real-
world outcomes for the ﬁfth-generation balloon
expandable
transcatheter
heart
valve
in
the
United States. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2024;17:
1032–1044.
10. Hafner F, Froehlich H, Gary T, Tiesenhausen K,
Scarpatetti M, Brodmann M. Blood pressure mea-
surements in patients with Takayasu arteritis: a work
of caution. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93:1299–1301.
KEY WORDS aortic regurgitation, heart
failure, transcatheter aortic valve
replacement, Takayasu’s arteritis
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this article.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 7 , 2 0 2 5
Kawamoto et al
J U L Y 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 1 3
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in Takayasu’s Arteritis
9
