
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Rare Case of Early Mycotic Ascending
Aortic Aneurysm Following Transcatheter
Aortic Valve Replacement
Bharat S. Sambyal, DM,a Nitin Patel, DM,b Prashant Panda, DM,c Yash Paul Sharma, DMd
ABSTRACT
Prosthetic valve endocarditis, though a rare complication, carries a high risk of morbidity and mortality. Mycotic
aneurysms are even less common and have been reported in association with femoral access (femoral artery
aneurysms) following transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR). We describe a rare case of a mycotic aneurysm that
developed in the ascending aorta after a TAVR procedure. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:102952) © 2025 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the
CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
A
pproximately 10% to 30% of all infective
endocarditis (IE) cases are prosthetic valve
endocarditis (PVE), which occurs in 0.3% to
1.2% of patients who undergo a surgical aortic valve
replacement (SAVR) every year. PVE can be very
serious and cause death in up to 30% of cases. It can
also damage the valve and lead to formation of ab-
scesses,
pseudoaneurysms,
ﬁstulas,
perforations,
heart blocks and stroke.1,2 Most studies on PVE have
focused on SAVR, but now there is more interest in
PVE
after
transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement
(TAVR). The rate of PVE after TAVR is approximately
between 0.6% and 3.4%.3 PVE after TAVR is different
from PVE after SAVR because it has speciﬁc infection
risks, which are related to access site and the fact that
the procedure is performed outside a standard oper-
ating theater. Other factors that may increase the
risk of infection are valve crimping injury, paravalvu-
lar leak turbulence, neoleaﬂet stress with misaligned
commissures, intact versus calciﬁed native leaﬂets,
and
intracardiac
hardware
such
as
pacemaker
leads.4,5
PVE presenting as an aortic mycotic aneurysm is
extremely
rare.
Approximately
5.9
out
of
every
100,000 people develop thoracic aortic aneurysms
every year, making thoracic aortic mycotic aneurysms
extremely rare.6 Panagides et al7 mention pseudoa-
neurysm in 7 patients out of 579 cases of deﬁnite IE,
which itself makes it a rare occurrence. There are very
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To be aware of such rare complications of TAVR.
 To understand the need for strict asepsis
during such procedures
 To
demonstrate
the
feasibility
of
trans-
thoracic and esophageal echo for diagnosing
periprosthetic valvular mycotic aneurysms.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102952
From the aDepartment of Cardiology, Indian Naval Hospital Ship ASVINI, RC Church, Colaba, Mumbai; bDepartment of Cardiology,
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education, Chandigarh, India; cDepartment of Cardiology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Education, Chandigarh, India; and the dDepartment of Cardiology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education, Chandigarh,
India.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received September 4, 2024; revised manuscript received October 17, 2024, accepted October 28, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
few reports of thoracic aortic aneurysms after
SAVR; however, there are no reported cases
of
thoracic
aortic
aneurysms
after
TAVR
presenting as early PVE. The femoral artery
can have mycotic aneurysms after TAVR.
Mycotic
aneurysms
often
cause
vague
symptoms and signs, such as fever, night
sweats,
high
white
blood
cell
count,
increased inﬂammatory markers, sepsis, pain
in the chest, difﬁculty in swallowing, cough,
wheezing, stridor, and pneumonitis.7 In order to di-
agnose and treat these patients early, a very high
index of suspicion is needed. Mycotic aneurysms can
easily rupture, leading to poor outcomes despite
medical
and
surgical
intervention.8-10
However,
imaging-guided early
diagnosis and antimicrobial
therapy help to achieve better prognosis in these
patients. Research has shown that most mycotic an-
eurysms (80%) are caused by microbial infection of
the aorta and only a few (3%) are estimated to involve
infection of an aneurysm that was already present.11
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION AND
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
A 67-year-old man with a history of being managed at
a different hospital presented to our institution with
complaints of chest pain, shortness of breath, and 1
episode of syncope and being managed for the same
at a government hospital in North India approxi-
mately 6 months ago. There he was diagnosed with
bicuspid aortic valve with severe aortic stenosis and
he underwent TAVR with a 30-mm valve via femoral
access at the same hospital in June 2021. After TAVR,
the patient was asymptomatic and his left ventricular
ejection fraction improved from 15% to 40%.
Two months after the procedure, he presented
with high-grade fever, anorexia, and weakness when
blood cultures revealed Burkholderia septicemia and
he was managed with antibiotics as per sensitivity
pattern for 6 weeks (meropenem, vancomycin, and
cotrimoxazole). Echocardiography was suggestive of
mild aortic valvular thickening. After intravenous
drug cessation, he again presented with recurrent
fever. Further investigations revealing an aortic root
abscess on the basis of echo ﬁndings of hyperechoic
lesions with perivalvular thickening. Repeat blood
culture revealed the growth of Stenotrophomonas
melophilia.
He
was
treated
with
antibiotics
for
approximately 1 month with only a partial response.
Therefore, the patient came to our institute for
further management on his own accord.
INVESTIGATIONS AND MANAGEMENT
At our institute, the patient presented with inter-
mittent fever, cough, weakness and investigations
suggested normocytic normochromic anemia, leuko-
cytosis with a shift to the left and thrombocytopenia.
Renal and liver function were normal.
An electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm, left
ventricular hypertrophy, left bundle branch block,
and ﬁrst-degree atrioventricular block (PR interval of
280 ms). A 2-dimensional transthoracic echocardio-
gram
revealed
heterogeneous
hyperechoic
lesion
with
perivalvular
thickening
and
a
peak
aortic
FIGURE 1
Transesophageal Echocardiography Images
(A) A 4-chamber view showing prosthetic aortic valve (acoustic shadow of the valve struts seen) with perivalvular oval opacity with hypo-
echoic centre. (B) A more short axis view of the prosthetic valve with para valvular opacity (red arrow indicating the paravalvular lesion).
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
IE = infective endocarditis
PVE = prosthetic valve
endocarditis
SAVR = surgical aortic valve
replacement
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Sambyal et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 , 2 0 2 5
Early Mycotic Ascending Aortic Aneurysm
F E B R U A R Y 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 5 2
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
velocity of 2.1 m/s with peak gradient of 19mmHg.
There
was
no
clot
or
effusion.
Transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) (Figure 1, Videos 2 and 3)
revealed an aortic root abscess with normal prosthetic
valve leaﬂets. Contrast-enhanced computed tomog-
raphy of the thorax and abdomen revealed hep-
atosplenomegaly, a splenic infarct and a calciﬁed
nodule in the lung. Computed tomography angiog-
raphy (Figures 2 and 3, Video 1) revealed a mycotic
ascending aortic aneurysm.
Blood culture revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
The patient was managed with antibiotics according
to the sensitivity pattern and needed supportive care
for 4 weeks for hemodynamic stabilization. Although
the details of previous culture were not available, the
close relationship of previous isolates to Pseudomonas
(Burkholderia and Stenotrophomonas melophilia; both
nosocomial gram-negative previously classiﬁed to the
Pseudomonas genus) and the site of the pseudoa-
neurysm (as noted on the 3-dimensional computed
tomography) with presentation 2 months after the
implant were highly suspicious of likely seeding of
the valve during the process of implantation.
The patient was further advised to undergo SAVR
with aortic root replacement as a deﬁnitive treatment
due to poor resolution of the root abscess and in-
ﬂammatory markers. Despite repeated counselling by
the treating team, the patient was unwilling to
FIGURE 2
Computed Tomography Scan
(A) Perivalvular mycotic aneurysm seen in aorta. (B) Axial section showing aortic mycotic aneurysm with a small neck (red arrow indicating the
lesion).
FIGURE 3
CT 3D Reconstruction of Aortic Root With the Prosthetic Valve
(A) Perivalvular mycotic aneurysm seen in aorta through the upper edge of valve (enface view). (B) Perivalvular mycotic aneurysm with a small
neck (proﬁle view); red arrow towards the aneurysm, yellow towards the upper edge of the prosthetic valve. See Video 1.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 , 2 0 2 5
Sambyal et al
F E B R U A R Y 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 5 2
Early Mycotic Ascending Aortic Aneurysm
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
undergo surgical intervention and did not consent for
further intervention. He was managed further with
oral antibiotics and after being culture negative, was
discharged against medical advice.
DISCUSSION
We report a rare case of thoracic aortic mycotic
aneurysm after TAVR. Common micro-organisms that
cause bacteremia during TAVR include staphylococci,
streptococci and enterococci.2 The usual causative
site for a femoral access is the groin. TAVR is per-
formed through a small hole in the femoral artery
instead of opening the chest during SAVR; thus, early
PVE may be less common, but many speciﬁc factors
related to TAVR can explain how it occurs. A prime
consideration is how to clean the place where trans-
catheter
procedures
are
performed.12,13
However,
many studies do not show a difference in the infec-
tion rates on the basis of where TAVR is performed in
the hospital, and several other studies have shown
similar results, when the procedure is performed at a
lower cost in a normal catheterization laboratory.14,15
Unfortunately, the emphasis on stringent infection
control protocols is generally less pronounced in
catheterization labs compared to operating rooms.
Hubble et al12 studied 2 types of ventilation in pro-
cedural rooms and reported that, regardless of what
sterile protective gear operators wore, positive pres-
sure labs had more bacterias, as measured by colony
forming units than laminar ﬂow theaters did. Other
risks are related to the TAVR procedure itself, such as
crimping of valve leaﬂets when loading and inﬂating
the valve, which can cause tiny cell damage that
causes
inﬂammation
and
bacterial
colonization.16
Paravalvular leak can also be a source of infection
due to turbulence between the transcatheter pros-
thesis and native valve, which increases platelet
clumping and blood clot formation.17,18 This aids
bacterial seeding, as the sticky platelet–ﬁbrin envi-
ronment is used by organisms to make the matrix of
vegetation.
PVE has been deﬁned for TAVR in the Valve Aca-
demic Research Consortium-2 document as follows:
fulﬁllment of the Duke criteria, evidence of abscess/
paravalvular leak/pus/vegetation on reoperation, or
the aforementioned ﬁndings during autopsy.18 PVE
can be categorized as early (within 2 months), inter-
mediate
(between
2
and
12
months),
or
late
(>12 months).19
TEE is suggested for patients who have at least a
possible IE according to clinical criteria or who have a
complicated IE (ie, a paravalvular abscess). It should
be performed again after 1 week if the results are not
clear and there is a high risk. A negative TEE does not
rule out PVE. With a negative TEE but high suspicion,
other imaging modalities, including magnetic reso-
nance imaging, leukocyte scanning, and 18F-ﬂuo-
rodeoxyglucose
positron
emission
tomography/
computed
tomography.
should
be
considered.20
Treatment of TAVR PVE consists of antimicrobial
therapy and surgical debridement, including graft
excision.
European guidelines for administrating antibiotics
before TAVR/SAVR surgery include the administra-
tion of antibiotics (i.e., intravenous cefazolin) prior
to access or incision. It is also suggested to screen
and treat for Staph. aureus before the procedure
(class I).21,22
CONCLUSIONS
To summarize, post TAVR thoracic aortic mycotic
aneurysm is a rare but a serious complication, with
high rates of morbidity and death. Being young has
always been a risk factor for PVE, which makes it
important to understand its presentation and how to
treat them according to guidelines for TAVR PVE, as
the current indications are expanding to younger and
lower-risk individuals. A team approach by a surgeon,
cardiologist, and infectious disease specialist can
help
improve
outcomes
in
these
complicated
patients.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr Bharat S.
Sambyal, Department of Cardiology, Indian Naval
Hospital Ship ASVINI, RC Church, Colaba, Mumbai
400005, India. E-mail: drbharatsambyal@gmail.com.
X handle: @drbharatsambyal.
Sambyal et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 , 2 0 2 5
Early Mycotic Ascending Aortic Aneurysm
F E B R U A R Y 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 5 2
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Pettersson GB, Hussain ST. Surgical treatment of
aortic valve endocarditis. In: Cohn LH, Adams DH,
eds. Cardiac surgery in the Adult. 5th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill Education; 2018:731–741.
2. Amat-Santos
IJ,
Messika-Zeitoun
D,
Eltchaninoff H, et al. Infective endocarditis after
transcatheter aortic valve implantation: results
from a large multicenter registry. Circulation.
2015;131:1566–1574.
3. Olsen NT, De Backer O, Thyregod HGH, et al.
Prosthetic valve endocarditis after transcatheter
aortic valve implantation. Circ Cardiovasc Interv.
2015;8:e001939. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCIN-
TERVENTIONS.114.001939
4. Kolte D, Goldsweig A, Kennedy KF, et al.
Comparison of incidence, predictors, and out-
comes of early infective endocarditis after trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation versus surgical
aortic valve replacement in the United States. Am
J Cardiol. 2018;122:2112–2119.
5. Yeo I, Kim LK, Park SO, Wong SC. In-hospital
infective endocarditis following transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement:
a
cross-sectional
study of the National Inpatient Sample data-
base in the USA. J Hosp Infect. 2018;100:444–
450.
6. Brunicardi F, Anderson D. Thoracic aneurysms
and aortic dissection. In: Schwartz’s principles of
surgery. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, Health
Professions Division; 2010:668–669.
7. Panagides V, Del Val D, Abdel-Wahab M, et al.
Perivalvular extension of infective endocarditis
after transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Clin
Infect Dis. 2022;75:638–646.
8. Afsari K, Stallone R, Wong GD. Mycotic (infec-
ted) aneurysm caused by Streptococcus pneumo-
niae. Infect Med. 2001;18(6).
9. Chan YC, Morales JP, Taylor PR. The manage-
ment of mycotic aortic aneurysms: is there a role
for
endoluminal
treatment?
Acta
Chir
Belg.
2005;105:580–587.
10. Mitrev
ZK,
Anguseva
TN.
Life-threatening
surgery for mycotic aneurysm. Aorta. 2013;1:193–
197.
11. Laohapensang K, Rutherford RB, Arworn S.
Infected aneurysm. Ann Vasc Dis. 2010;3:16–23.
https://doi.org/10.3400/avd.ctiia09002
12. Hubble MJ, Weale AE, Perez JV, Bowker KE,
MacGowan AP, Bannister GC. Clothing in laminar-
ﬂow operating theatres. J Hosp Infect. 1996;32:1–7.
13. Mylotte D, Andalib A, Theriault-Lauzier P, et al.
Transcatheter heart valve failure: a systematic
review. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:1306–1327.
14. Babaliaros V, Devireddy C, Lerakis S, et al.
Comparison of transfemoral transcatheter aortic
valve replacement performed in the catheteriza-
tion
laboratory
(minimalist
approach)
versus
hybrid operating room (standard approach): out-
comes and cost analysis. JACC Cardiovasc Interv.
2014;7:898–904.
15. Spaziano M, Lefevre T, Romano M, et al.
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement in the
catheterization laboratory versus hybrid operating
room: insights from the FRANCE TAVI registry.
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;11:2195–2203.
16. Kiefer P, Gruenwald F, Kempfert J, et al.
Crimping may affect the durability of trans-
catheter valves: an experimental analysis. Ann
Thorac Surg. 2011;92:155–160.
17. Dapas JI, Rivero C, Burgos P, Vila A. Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa infective endocarditis following
aortic valve implantation: a note of caution. Open
Cardiovasc Med J. 2016;10:28–34.
18. McGifﬁn DC, Kirklin JK. The impact of aortic
valve homografts on the treatment of aortic
prosthetic valve endocarditis. Semin Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 1995;7:25–31.
19. Kappetein AP, Head SJ, Genereux P, et al.
Updated standardized endpoint deﬁnitions for
transcatheter aortic valve implantation: the Valve
Academic
Research
Consortium-2
consensus
document. Eur Heart J. 2012;22:2403–2418.
20. Kuttamperoor F, Yandrapalli S, Siddhamsetti S,
FrishmanWH,Tang GHL. Infectious endocarditisafter
transcatheter aortic valve replacement: epidemi-
ology and outcomes. Cardiol Rev. 2019;27:236–241.
21. Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes MJ, et al. 2015
ESC guidelines for the management of infective
endocarditis: the Task Force for the Management
of Infective Endocarditis of the European Society
of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by: European As-
sociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS), the
European
Association
of
Nuclear
Medicine
(EANM). Eur Heart J. 2015;36:3075–3128.
22. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020
ACC/AHA guideline for the management of pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77(4):e25–e197.
KEY WORDS infective endocarditis,
prosthetic valve endocarditis, thoracic aortic
mycotic aneurysms, transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 , 2 0 2 5
Sambyal et al
F E B R U A R Y 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 5 2
Early Mycotic Ascending Aortic Aneurysm
5
