
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Renal Artery Perforation During 
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
Saleh Altaf, MD, Hammad Shafique, MD, Alexander Tindale, MD, Konstantinou Konstantinos, MD, Tito Kabir, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a well-established modality to treat severe aortic 
stenosis.
CASE SUMMARY We report a case of a woman in her 70s who underwent TAVR. The procedure was complicated 
owing to right renal artery perforation by a 0.038-inch angled-tip hydrophilic guidewire during closure of the left 
femoral artery, requiring implantation of a covered stent in renal artery to achieve hemostasis.
DISCUSSION In cases of shock during TAVR, injury to nonaccess site vessels should be considered. Treatment of 
iatrogenic renal artery injury with covered stent deployment achieves rapid hemostasis and preserves kidney function.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES In case of periprocedural hemorrhagic shock during TAVR, injury to nonaccess site vessels 
should be considered. Meticulous fluoroscopic guidance should always be used when advancing guidewires to prevent 
vascular damage. Awareness of patient-specific anatomical variation of arteries can help the operator to be
more cautious and avoid entering that artery. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105299) © 2025 The Authors. Published by 
Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A woman in her late 70s was referred to the cardiol-
ogy clinic for several months of progressively wors-
ening dyspnea on exertion. Her past medical history 
was remarkable only for hypertension and shellfish 
allergy. On physical examination, a loud ejection 
systolic murmur was audible in the second inter-
costal space at the right sternal border, with radiation 
to the carotid arteries. Her echocardiography 
confirmed severe aortic stenosis with preserved left 
ventricular function. A diagnostic coronary angio-
gram demonstrated a severe lesion in ostial left main 
coronary artery. Therefore, 1 month before a trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) procedure, 
the patient had a balloon aortic valvuloplasty and
percutaneous coronary intervention to the left main 
coronary artery.
The patient then attended for her TAVR procedure. 
After primary access was obtained through the left
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• In case of peri-procedural hemorrhagic 
shock during TAVR, injury to non-access site 
vessels should be considered.
• Meticulous fluoroscopic guidance should 
always be used when advancing guidewires 
to prevent vascular damage.
• Awareness of patient-specific anatomical 
variation of arteries can help operator to be 
more cautious and avoid entering that 
artery.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105299
From the Cardiology Department, Harefield Hospital, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. 
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received April 22, 2025; revised manuscript received July 14, 2025, accepted July 21, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 1 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
femoral artery and secondary access was 
obtained through right radial artery, a 
Sapien S Ultra 26-mm valve (Edwards Life-
sciences) was deployed under rapid pacing 
from a stiff guidewire in the left ventricle. A 
dry closure technique was employed to close 
the left femoral artery access site, which involved 
advancing a 0.038-inch angled-tip hydrophilic 
guidewire (Radifocus, Terumo UK) from the right 
radial artery down to the left external iliac artery 
under fluoroscopic guidance. The guidewire briefly 
entered some aortic side branches before being 
repositioned to the left external iliac artery; however, 
no resistance or unusual features were noted during 
repositioning. This was exchanged for a 0.035-inch 
standard J-tip guidewire via a 6-F pigtail catheter. A 
12-mm Armada balloon (Abbott Medical UK) was then 
advanced over the 0.035-inch standard J-tip guide-
wire and was inflated in the left external iliac artery 
until pressure reduction to <40 mm Hg was achieved 
on the femoral arterial tracing. After closure of the 
left femoral access site with 2 Perclose ProStyles 
(Abbott Medical UK) and an Angio-Seal (Terumo UK) 
over a standard J-wire used to protect the primary 
access site, the patient developed acute hypotension, 
with blood pressure of 60/40 mm Hg (Figure 1).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS AND 
INVESTIGATIONS
An aortogram showed an optimally positioned valve 
with no transvalvular or paravalvular leak. No aortic 
annular rupture or obvious aortic dissection flap
was identified. Transthoracic echocardiography 
confirmed a well-seated prosthetic valve with no 
regurgitation, a hyperdynamic left ventricle with 
only a trivial pericardial effusion, and a collapsing 
inferior vena cava. A digital subtraction angiogram 
from the aortic root to the left femoral artery did not 
show any vascular injury or bleeding point. Coronary 
angiography demonstrated some haziness in the left 
main coronary artery, suggesting a possible 
thrombus. The remainder of the coronary arteries 
were unobstructed. Given the paucity of obvious 
causes of such profound hypotension, a drug-eluting 
stent was deployed in the left main coronary artery, 
but this intervention did not improve the blood 
pressure. The patient was treated with 3 boluses of 
25 μg of intravenous adrenaline and 100 mg of 
intravenous 
hydrocortisone 
to 
treat 
possible 
anaphylactic shock from intraprocedural medications 
(cefuroxime, teicoplanin, and protamine). The pa-
tient’s blood pressure temporarily improved but 
dropped again. Subsequently, a continuous infusion 
of adrenaline was used for vasopressor support. 
Arterial blood gas analysis revealed hemoglobin of 
4.8 g/dL and lactate of 1.5 mmol/L. Compared with 
preprocedure hemoglobin of 11.3 g/dL, it was a sig-
nificant drop. To identify the source of bleeding, a 
whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan with 
contrast was performed, which identified active 
contrast extravasation at the origin of an accessory 
renal artery from the main right renal artery 
(Figure 2). There was no abnormal dilatation, aneu-
rysm, or dissection of renal arteries. Perfusion of 
both kidneys was normal.
VISUAL SUMMARY Procedural Timeline
CT = computed tomography.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Altaf et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 1 , 2 0 2 5
Renal Artery Perforation During TAVR 
O C T O B E R 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 9 9
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
MANAGEMENT
Two units of packed red blood cells were rapidly 
transfused, and emergency transfer to the theater for 
vascular surgery was arranged. However, even in this 
short time window the hemodynamic situation 
worsened, with unrecordable blood pressure and 
reduced consciousness, therefore the patient was 
taken back to the catheterization laboratory. A third 
access site was obtained from the right femoral ar-
tery, and the bleeding point at the origin of the right 
accessory renal artery (a branch of the main right 
renal artery) was identified on angiography (Figure 3). 
The right renal artery was engaged with a Judkins 
right 4.0 catheter, expediently wired using an Asahi 
Sion blue guidewire (Asahi Intecc), and a 3.5 × 20 mm 
PK Papyrus covered stent (Biotronik UK) was 
deployed. After this, hemostasis was confirmed on 
fluoroscopy (Figure 4). The right femoral arterial ac-
cess site was closed with an Angio-Seal, and the right 
radial access site was closed using a pressure band.
FIGURE 2 Cross-Sectional Computed Tomography Image of the Abdomen Showing 
Contrast Extravasation From the Right Renal Artery (Red Arrow)
FIGURE 1 Mechanism of Injury and Management With Covered Stent
TAVI = transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Altaf et al
O C T O B E R 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 9 9 
Renal Artery Perforation During TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
The patient was transferred to intensive care unit for 
further care.
OUTCOME
Prior to discharge, ultrasound of the kidneys showed 
normal shape and size of both kidneys, with well-
maintained corticomedullary differentiation. Trans-
thoracic echocardiography revealed a well-seated 
prosthetic valve. The patient’s hemoglobin was 
9.1 g/dL (baseline: 11.3 g/dL), and serum creatinine 
remained normal throughout admission. At the 3-
month follow-up, she was clinically well, with an 
unremarkable echocardiogram and renal ultrasound.
DISCUSSION
The aim of this case report is to highlight an unusual 
vascular injury that occurred in our patient during 
TAVR. Vascular injuries are among the most common 
complications of TAVR. Data from large registries and 
meta-analyses indicate that the risk of vascular 
injury is 0.94% to 11.9%, with access site complica-
tions being the most common, 1,2 but there is a 
paucity of data on the frequency of injury to indi-
vidual nonaccess site arteries and subsequent man-
agement strategies to prevent damage to the organ 
supplied.
To the best of our knowledge, there is only 1 other 
case report of renal artery perforation during TAVR, 
by Kilic et al. 3 The investigators postulated that
perforation of the renal artery occurred from the 
0.035-inch J-tip guidewire during postclosure angi-
ography of the femoral artery access site, and devi-
ation of abdominal aorta to the right side was 
identified as the risk factor, making manipulation of 
the guidewire challenging. In comparison, renal ar-
tery injury in our patient occurred from a 0.038-inch 
angled-tip hydrophilic guidewire during dry closure 
of the femoral access site. CT scan and renal angi-
ography identified an accessory renal artery origi-
nating from the main right renal artery, with bleeding 
at the point of origin accessory renal artery. We hy-
pothesize that this anatomical variant, present in 
8.34% of the general population, 4 was a contributing 
factor leading to perforation.
To avoid a similar complication, the following 3 
precautions can be taken:
1. Use of safer guidewires: Operators should aim to 
use a standard J-tip guidewire to cross into the 
descending aorta from the right subclavian artery, 
rather than use a hydrophilic guidewire first-line. 
A standard J-tip guidewire with large primary 
curve is safer, with less risk of inadvertently 
entering side branches, thereby reducing the risk 
of injury. The hydrophilic guidewires should only 
be used once attempts with a standard guidewire 
have been exhausted.
2. Meticulous fluoroscopic guidance: The tip of the 
guidewire should always be visible on the
FIGURE 4 Angiography Showing Adequate Hemostasis With 
Covered Stent Deployed in the Right Renal Artery (Red 
Arrow)
Absence of accessory renal artery, visible in Figure 3, can be 
appreciated.
FIGURE 3 Angiography of the Right Renal Artery Showing 
Contrast Extravasation (Red Arrow) at the Origin of the 
Accessory Renal Artery
An accessory renal artery can be seen (yellow arrowhead) 
originating from the right renal artery (yellow arrow).
Altaf et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 1 , 2 0 2 5
Renal Artery Perforation During TAVR 
O C T O B E R 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 9 9
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
fluoroscopy screen while advancing the guide-
wire, to avoid entering deep into the side 
branches.
3. Awareness of patient-specific arterial anatomy:
The presence of any arterial anatomical varia-
tion, found incidentally on CT angiogram for 
TAVR planning, should make operators more 
cognizant of patient-specific arterial anatomy, 
and caution should be taken to avoid entering 
that artery.
Management of iatrogenic renal artery injury, pri-
marily discussed in the interventional radiology 
literature, can be summarized as follows:
1. Balloon tamponade: Inflating a balloon in the
renal artery can provide temporary hemostasis 
and help to hemodynamically stabilize the pa-
tient until more expert help from interven-
tional radiologists and vascular surgeons is 
available. Balloon tamponade alone has been 
shown to achieve permanent hemostasis in a 
case series. 5
2. Covered stent deployment: If the proximal portion
of the renal artery with relatively bigger caliber is 
perforated, a covered stent placement can be used 
to seal the perforation. 6 This strategy was used in
our patient. It preserves blood flow to the renal 
parenchyma but can be difficult in distal small 
caliber branches.
3. Arterial embolization: In case of perforation in a 
distal small caliber vessel, arterial embolization 
can be used to secure hemostasis. 7
4. Surgery: Surgical intervention might be needed, 
especially in hospitals where expertise for less 
invasive procedures is not available. 8
CONCLUSIONS
Our case demonstrates a rare vascular complication 
of TAVR. It highlights the risk of injury to nonaccess 
site vessels, especially if there is a variation in arte-
rial anatomy, and emphasizes the importance of 
meticulous fluoroscopic guidance.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Hammad
Shafique, Cardiology Department, Harefield Hospital, 
Hill End Road, Harefield, London UB9 6JH, United 
Kingdom. E-mail: hammad.shafique@nhs.net.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Harvey JE, Kapadia SR, Cohen DJ, et al. Trends 
in complications among patients undergoing 
aortic valve replacement in the United States. 
J Am Heart Assoc. 2024;13(17):e031461.
2. Généreux P, Head SJ, Van Mieghem NM, et al. 
Clinical outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement using valve Academic Research 
Consortium Definitions: a weighted meta-analysis 
of 3,519 patients from 16 studies. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2012;59(25):2317–2326.
3. Kilic T, Acar B, Karauzum K, Bildirici IHU, 
Coskun S, Karauzum I. Renal artery perforation 
following transcatheter aortic valve replacement:
keeping the eyes and fluoroscopy open. Acta 
Cardiol Sin. 2019;35(6):649–651.
4. Triantafyllou G, Paschopoulos I, We˛giel A, et al. 
The accessory renal arteries: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Clin Anat. 2024;38(6):660– 
672.
5. Morris CS, Bonnevie GJ, Najarian KE. Nonsur-
gical treatment of acute iatrogenic renal artery 
injuries occurring after renal artery angioplasty 
and stenting. Am J Roentgenol. 2001;177(6):1353– 
1357.
6. Bates MC, Shamsham FM, Faulknier B, Crotty B. 
Successful treatment of iatrogenic renal artery
perforation with an autologous vein-covered 
stent. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2002;57(1):39– 
43.
7. Contegiacomo A, Amodeo EM, Cina A, et al. 
Renal artery embolization for iatrogenic renal 
vascular injuries management: 5 years’ experi-
ence. Br J Radiol. 2019;93(1106):20190256.
8. Tillou A, Romero J, Asensio JA, et al. Renal 
vascular injuries. Surg Clin North Am. 2001;81(6): 
1417–1430.
KEY WORDS hemorrhagic shock, renal 
artery perforation, TAVR complication
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Altaf et al
O C T O B E R 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 2 9 9 
Renal Artery Perforation During TAVR
5
