
=== PAGE 1 ===
THROMBUS MANAGEMENT
HOW WE DID IT
Removal of Massive Left Atrial 
Appendage Closure Device–Related 
Thrombus With Complete
Embolic Protection
Step-by-Step Technique
Chantal Y. Asselin, MD, MSC, Mostafa Naguib, MD, Konstantinos P. Koulogiannis, MD, Conner O’Keefe, MD, 
Daniel Bachman, MD, Robert Kipperman, MD, John Brown III, MD, Linda Gillam, MD, Philippe Généreux, MD, 
Gennaro Giustino, MD
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVE Device-related thrombus (DRT) is a life-threatening complication of left atrial appendage closure devices. 
Transcatheter vacuum-assisted thrombectomy has recently been described as a novel strategy for removal of large DRT, 
but it is associated with increased risk of systemic embolism. We describe a step-by-step technique of a complete 
embolic protection strategy in patients undergoing vacuum-assisted thrombectomy.
KEY STEPS First, bilateral cerebral embolic protection devices are deployed. Next, systemic embolic protection is 
achieved by positioning an ONO retrieval device (Onocor) within the proximal aortic arch. An arterial return cannula is 
inserted. Then, transseptal crossing is performed with positioning of a suction catheter within the left atrium for 
aspiration thrombectomy.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS Aspiration should be performed meticulously, avoiding traumatic dislodgment of thrombotic 
material. The ONO basket must be assessed for embolic debris before its removal using transesophageal echocardiog-
raphy. Long-term oral anticoagulation should be considered if tolerated.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Transseptal transcatheter vacuum-assisted thrombectomy with complete embolic protection 
is a viable and effective strategy to prevent thromboembolic complications for life-threatening DRT. (JACC Case Rep. 
2026;31:106928) © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
L 
eft atrial appendage closure (LAAC) has 
become a routine procedure for stroke pre-
vention in patients with atrial fibrillation
where long-term oral anticoagulation (OAC) is con-
traindicated. 1-3 Postimplantation, short-term OAC is
required to prevent device-related thrombus (DRT), 
however DRT may still occur, posing significant chal-
lenges in clinical management and increasing the risk 
of serious embolic complications. Large, multicenter, 
international registries have indicated that DRTs
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2026.106928
From the Gagnon Cardiovascular Institute, Atlantic Health System, Morristown, New Jersey, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received August 6, 2025; revised manuscript received October 8, 2025, accepted October 10, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 6
ª 2 0 2 6 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
often lead to increased risk of death, 
ischemic stroke, and systemic emboliza-
tion. 4 The 2023 Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography & Interventions and Heart 
Rhythm Society joint expert consensus state-
ment regarding DRTs recommends treatment 
with OACs, with repeat imaging at 45- to 90-
day intervals until resolution. 5 No formal 
guideline recommendations currently exist 
regarding optimal treatment of DRTs in pa-
tients in whom OAC is high risk or contrain-
dicated. Surgical thrombectomy can be considered 
but may be prohibitive in some patients.
Recently, transcatheter vacuum-assisted mass 
extraction devices have emerged as a viable alterna-
tive in high-risk surgical patients. 6-8 Concomitant 
use of neuroprotection devices is advised, however 
the risk of systemic embolization of thrombotic 
debris remains. Therefore, we propose a novel tech-
nique with step-by-step instructions of a complete 
embolic protection strategy to mitigate the risk of 
both cerebrovascular and systemic thromboembolic 
phenomena during vacuum-assisted mechanical 
thrombectomy.
CASE SUMMARY
An 81-year-old man presented to the hospital after 
sustaining a fall, with a prolonged downtime of 
3 days owing to an acute ischemic stroke. The pa-
tient’s medical history included type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obstructive 
sleep apnea, moderate aortic stenosis, sick sinus 
syndrome with prior insertion of a single-lead 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator, and persis-
tent atrial fibrillation. Because of his history of
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Device-related
thrombus
is
a
life-
threatening complication of left atrial 
appendage closure devices.
• Transseptal transcatheter vacuum-assisted 
thrombectomy is an effective alternative to 
surgery or anticoagulation for device-
related thrombus.
• Complete embolic protection is a viable and 
effective strategy to prevent cerebral and 
systemic thromboembolic complications.
FIGURE 1
Initial Evaluation of a Massive Left Atrial Appendage Closure Device–Related Thrombus on Transesophageal Echocardiography
A
B
C
D
E
F
(A to C) Visualization of a massive device-related thrombus (red arrows) in the left atrium on 2D TEE. (D to F) TEE 3D imaging of a massive device-related thrombus.
2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
DRT = device-related
thrombus
LA = left atrium
LAAC = left atrial appendage
closure
OAC = oral anticoagulation
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
Asselin et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 6
Transcatheter Removal of Device-Related Thrombus
M A R C H 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 2 8
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
multiple falls with high risk of intracranial hemor-
rhage, the patient had undergone LAAC with a 
Watchman device 2 months prior. His anti-
coagulation was discontinued after LAAC. He was
maintained on dual-antiplatelet therapy with aspirin 
and clopidogrel.
The initial computed tomography of the head 
demonstrated a linear area of increased attenuation
FIGURE 2 Initial Cardiac CT Angiography Demonstrating a Massive Left Atrial Appendage Closure Device–Related Thrombus
A
B
(A) Visualization of left atrial appendage device (yellow arrow) with attached massive thrombus (red arrow). (B) Massive thrombus within the 
left atrium (red arrow). CT = computed tomography.
TABLE 1 Equipment List
Procedural Step
Item and Description
Vascular access
Initial RFA access with 4-F sheath (VSI Micro introducer 4-F 7 cm; Teleflex), exchanged to 8-F sheath (Pinnacle 8-F 0.038-
inch × 10 cm; Terumo Medical), then exchanged to 16-F sheath (DrySeal Flex introducer 16-F; 5.3 × 6.1 mm, 33 cm; 
Gore Medical) used to deploy the ONO retrieval system.
Secondary LFA access with 4-F sheath (VSI Micro introducer 4-F 7 cm; Teleflex), exchanged to 8-F sheath (Pinnacle 8-F 
0.038-inch × 10 cm; Terumo Medical), then exchanged to 15-F sheath (DrySeal Flex introducer 17-F; 5.0 × 5.6 mm, 
33 cm; Gore Medical) for arterial cannula placement for blood return.
Tertiary RFV access with 4-F sheath (VSI Micro introducer 4-F 7 cm; Teleflex), exchanged to 8-F sheath (Pinnacle 8-F 
0.038-inch × 10 cm; Terumo Medical), then exchanged to 26-F sheath (DrySeal Flex introducer 26-F; 8.7 × 9.5 mm, 
33 cm; Gore Medical).
Complete embolic 
protection
Cor Runthrough guidewire 0.014-inch × 300 cm (Terumo Medical) or Hi-Torque Whisper ES STR guidewire 0.035-
inch × 190 cm (Abbott)
Catheter filter Sentinel cerebral protection system ×2 (Boston Scientific)
17-F TruSteer access system (Boston Scientific) or 14-F DrySeal sheath (Gore Medical)
ONO retrieval (Onocor)
Transseptal crossing
Cor Runthrough guidewire 0.014-inch × 300 cm (Terumo Medical) or Hi-Torque Whisper guidewire 0.035-inch × 190 cm 
(Abbott)
VersaCross large access solution (Boston Scientific)
Confida Brecker guidewire CRV 0.035-inch × 260 cm (Medtronic)
Armada balloon 35 OTW 12 mm × 40 mm × 135 cm (Abbott)
Suction catheter
Cannula with dilator AngioVac 180 ◦ (AngioDynamics) 
ECMO system
ECMO oxygenator module a
AngioVac reservoir filter
15-F or 17-F arterial return cannula (Medtronic)
ASD closure (optional)
Ampltazer cribriform occluder (Abbott) (or other ASD closure device)
Closure device
Perclose ProGlide ×7 (Abbott) (or other closure device)
a Optional equipment.
ASD = atrial septal defect; ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; LFA = left femoral artery; RFA = right femoral artery; RFV = right femoral vein.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 6 
Asselin et al
M A R C H 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 2 8 
Transcatheter Removal of Device-Related Thrombus
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
in the right occipitoparietal region concerning for 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Subsequent work-up 
including magnetic resonance imaging of the brain 
reveled an acute infarct involving the right para-
median parieto-occipital lobe with an area of 
evolving hemorrhagic transformation and laminar 
necrosis. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 
revealed a very large (4.8 × 3 cm) mobile thrombus 
attached to the prior Watchman with concomitant 
mild left atrial (LA) enlargement (Figure 1, Video 1). 
Biventricular systolic function was preserved. After 
discussion with the neurology and neurosurgery 
teams, the patient was initiated on full-dose 
anticoagulation.
The patient was evaluated by both the cardiac 
surgery and structural heart teams, who deter-
mined that he was at prohibitive risk for open heart 
surgery given the high risk of hemorrhagic con-
version of the acute stroke. Subsequent imaging 
with transthoracic echocardiography and computed 
tomography demonstrated elimination of the LAA 
thrombus with no signs of resolution or reduction 
in size despite anticoagulation (Figure 2, Video 2). 
After multidisciplinary discussion, the DRT was 
considered at an unacceptable risk for repeat 
embolic events if treated with OACs alone given 
high-risk features including size, mobility, attach-
ment to the atrial surface involving the central 
screw hub of the device, extension into the left 
atrial cavity, and patient’s presentation of acute 
ischemic stroke.
Therefore, the patient underwent percutaneous 
vacuumed-assisted mechanical thrombectomy with 
a complete embolic protection strategy including 
bilateral cerebral embolic protection and systemic 
embolic protection with the ONO retrieval device 
(Onocor). After multiple runs of aspiration, the 
thrombus was successfully removed. Total fluoro-
scopic time was 32 minutes. Repeat transthoracic 
echocardiography demonstrated elimination of the 
LA thrombus. A discrete 3-mm leak around the 
device was newly identified; its role in the original 
thrombus formation as compared with persistent 
atrial fibrillation is unknown at the present time, 
however other risk factors for thrombus formation 
were excluded. The patient’s neurological status 
improved after the procedure, and there were no 
neurological deficits. He was discharged to an acute 
rehabilitation facility on OAC therapy with planned 
repeat TEE in 6 to 8 weeks to ensure no new 
thrombus formation.
PROCEDURAL STEPS
EQUIPMENT. The equipment used for the vacuum-
assisted mechanical thrombectomy with complete 
embolic protection is listed in Table 1, and the step-
by-step instructions for the procedure are described 
in Table 2.
COMPLETE EMBOLIC PROTECTION. We developed a
novel concept of a complete embolic protection
TABLE 2 Step-by-Step Protocol for Transseptal Transcatheter Vacuum-Assisted Thrombectomy With Complete Embolic Protection
1. Obtain vascular access (right and left femoral arteries of 15-F and 17-F; either right or left femoral vein, 26-F) per the usual standard.
2. Deploy bilateral cerebral protection devices.
3. Advance the 17-F TruSteer access system into the proximal ascending aortic arch.
4. Advance the ONO retrieval system through the steerable sheath and deploy it within the proximal ascending aortic arch (substitute with a 14-F 
DrySeal sheath delivered via transaxillary access). 9
5. Confirm ONO retrieval system position on fluoroscopy and TEE.
6. Insert 15-F or 17-F arterial return ECMO cannula into a peripheral artery.
7. Perform transseptal cross per the usual standard.
8. Advance a stiff guidewire transeptally (we use a Versacross wire) and perform balloon septostomy (we use a 12-mm Armada balloon).
9. Advance the suction catheter into the LA (we used AngioVac 180 ◦ ).
10. Inflate a large balloon (we use a 12-mm Armada balloon) at the distal tip of the suction catheter to deploy the basket.
11. Connect suction catheter circuit (AngioVac) with an extracorporeal pump ensuring connection with a reservoir filter to capture the thrombotic 
material.
12. Perform transseptal transcatheter vacuum-assisted thrombectomy.
13. Assess ONO retrieval system for embolic tissue using TEE prior to removal.
14. Remove the complete embolic protection devices (ONO retrieval system, Sentinel cerebral protection system ×2).
15. Option to use an ASO device if right-to-left or bidirectional shunting leading to hypoxemia, or left-to-right shunting leading to RV dysfunction is 
observed.
16. Remove all sheaths and close vascular access with closure device of choice (we use the Abbott Perclose ProGlide).
ASO = atrial septal occluder; ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; LA = left atrium; RV = right ventricle; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
Asselin et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 6
Transcatheter Removal of Device-Related Thrombus 
M A R C H 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 2 8
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
strategy that can be used in cases where an extra-large 
intracardiac mobile thrombus requires vacuum-
assisted 
mechanical 
thrombectomy 
given 
an 
elevated risk of both cerebral and systemic throm-
boembolization, which could otherwise be a devas-
tating and a potentially life-threatening complication 
of the procedure. The first step of this technique 
requires large-bore vascular access, which should be 
appropriately assessed prior to the procedure using 
contrast computed tomography. Next, a bilateral 
cerebral embolic protection device (Sentinel cerebral 
protection system, Boston Scientific) should be
deployed per the usual standard to prevent micro-
embolic phenomena from causing acute cerebrovas-
cular infarcts. This is followed by deployment of a 
systemic embolic protection device such as the ONO 
retrieval device. A 17-F TruSteer sheath (Boston Sci-
entific), which can be advanced over a standard 
0.035-inch stiff guidewire and positioned within the 
aortic arch proximal to the brachiocephalic trunk is 
utilized as access for the ONO retrieval system. The 
ONO retrieval device may be advanced through the 
steerable sheath and opened in the proximal aortic 
arch. Device positioning should be assessed
FIGURE 3
Step-by-Step Technique of Transseptal Transcatheter Vacuum-Assisted Thrombectomy With Complete Embolic Protection Under Fluoroscopic
Guidance
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
(A) Insertion of an arterial return cannula in the left femoral artery. (B) Secondary vascular access of right femoral artery for insertion of the TruSteer with the Ono
device in the ascending aorta. (C) Deployment of bilateral cerebral protection devices. (D) Deployment of ONO retrieval device in the proximal aortic arch distal to the
brachiocephalic trunk. (E) Complete embolic protection. (F) Transseptal puncture. (G) Transseptal crossing with a Versacross guidewire in the left atrium. (H) Partial
inflation of 12-mm Armada balloon. (I) Septostomy with 12-mm Armada balloon. (J) Advancement of suction catheter transseptally. (K) Suction catheter basket
deployment in the left atrium using a 12-mm Armada balloon using balloon-tracking technique. (L) Vacuum-assisted mechanical thrombectomy under complete
embolic protection.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 6 
Asselin et al
M A R C H 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 2 8 
Transcatheter Removal of Device-Related Thrombus
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
intraprocedurally 
on 
fluoroscopy 
and 
TEE 
(Figures 3E, 4C, and 4D). As the ONO basket has open 
cells, it does not cause hemodynamic instability or 
obstruction to flow, while protecting from embo-
lisms of large thrombotic masses.
VACUUM-ASSISTED MECHANICAL THROMBECTOMY. A
transseptal approach for removal of left-sided 
intracardiac masses using a vacuum-assisted mass 
extraction device has been previously described. 6 
First, a 15-F or 17-F arterial return cannula is inser-
ted and is preclosed with 2 ProGlide (Abbott) in the 
right or left common femoral artery. Insertion of a 
return cannula in the arterial system will prevent 
hypotension during aspiration and reduction in 
preload in the left-side cardiac chambers. Placement 
of the return cannula within the arterial system 
should be considered in patients that require pro-
longed aspirations in the left-side chambers which 
can result in hypotension due to reduction in car-
diac pre-load. Then, transseptal crossing may be
performed with a dedicated device such as the 
VersaCross large access solution system (Boston 
Scientific) and confirmed using a combination of 
imaging modalities (fluoroscopy, TEE, or intracar-
diac echocardiography). A stiff 0.035-inch wire (eg, 
Confida guidewire; Medtronic) is positioned within 
the LA to facilitate delivery of a noncompliant 
ballon (12-mm Armada balloon; Abbott) for septos-
tomy. A suction catheter (AngioVac C180; AngioDy-
namics) is then advanced into the LA, and vacuum-
assisted mechanical thrombectomy is performed as 
previously described. 6 
Suction power can be 
increased during the procedure by augmenting the 
flow on the extracorporeal pump connected to the 
reservoir filter. Transition of the thrombectomy 
cannula across the septum can be facilitated using 
the balloon-tracking technique. 6 A summary of the 
step-by-step technique under fluoroscopic and TEE 
guidance is represented in Figure 3 (Video 3) and 
Figure 4, respectively.
FIGURE 4
Step-by-Step Technique of Transseptal Transcatheter Vacuum-Assisted Thrombectomy With Complete Embolic Protection Under TEE Guidance
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
(A and B) Assessment of massive left atrial appendage closure device thrombus. (C) Deployment of the ONO retrieval device in the proximal aortic arch distal to the
brachiocephalic trunk. (D) Assessment of ONO retrieval device position. (E) Transseptal puncture. (F) Transseptal crossing with a Confida guidewire in the left atrium.
(G) Septostomy with 12-mm Armada balloon. (H to J) Vacuum-assisted mechanical thrombectomy under complete embolic protection. (K) Post-thrombectomy
assessment of the ONO retrieval device basket with absence of embolic debris. (L) Visualization of the left atrial appendage closure device with notable absence of
thrombus. TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.
Asselin et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 6
Transcatheter Removal of Device-Related Thrombus 
M A R C H 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 2 8
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
There are potential pitfalls of this technique that need 
to be mentioned. First, deployment of a complete 
embolic protection strategy requires familiarity with 
the ONO retrieval device as well as cerebral protection 
devices. The ONO retrieval device must be advanced 
through a large-bore 17-F steerable sheath inserted in 
a peripheral artery, which can increase the risk of 
vascular and bleeding complications. Once the basket 
is opened, an echocardiographer must confirm its 
position as well as assess the basket for embolic 
debris before its removal (Video 4). If this basket is 
not adequately assessed before its removal, periph-
eral or visceral ischemia may ensue. If embolic debris 
is identified within the basket, the basket should be 
pulled back into the descending thoracic aorta before 
device recapture. This should be performed with ce-
rebral embolic protection devices in situ. Second, the 
ONO retrieval device is a novel technology, with only 
a few reports of its use; it therefore may be associated 
with a more unpredictable pattern of use. 10-12 Thirdly, 
the operator should have access to multiple trans-
catheter vacuum-assisted devices (eg, Inari, Alpha-
Vac, AngioVac) for extra-large thrombus removal, as a 
combination of devices may be required. Finally, this 
procedure does not guarantee complete thrombus 
removal, as small microthrombotic particles may still 
be adherent to the LAAC device, nor does it prevent 
reoccurrence of DRTs. Therefore, consideration for 
long-term OAC should be discussed on a case-by-case 
basis after the procedure.
CONCLUSIONS
To our knowledge, this is the first description of a 
complete embolic protection strategy during trans-
septal vacuum-based thrombectomy for a massive 
life-threatening DRT. The ONO device was demon-
strated to be useful for securing systemic embolic 
protection, avoiding peripheral or visceral infarction. 
In high- or extreme-risk patients, this technique 
should be considered in case of massive DRT as an 
alternative to open heart surgery or OAC alone.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge all 
of the health care workers and ancillary hospital staff 
who were involved in the care of the patient.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Koulogiannis has been a consultant for Edwards Lifesciences and 
Medtronic. Dr Gillam has been an advisor to Medtronic, Philips, and 
Egnite. Dr Généreux has received institutional research grants from 
Edwards Lifesciences; consulting fees from Abbott, Cordis, Edwards 
Lifesciences, Egnite, Haemonetics, Medtronic, Opsens, Puzzle Med-
ical, Pi-Cardia, 4C medical; has equity in Puzzle Medical and Pi-
Cardia; and was principal investigator of the EARLY TAVR trial and 
the PROGRESS trial, both sponsored by Edwards Lifesciences. Dr 
Giustino has been a proctor and consultant for Edwards Lifesciences. 
All other authors have reported that they have no relationships 
relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Gennaro
Giustino, Valve and Structural Heart Center, Gagnon 
Cardiovascular Institute, Atlantic Health System, 100 
Madison Avenue, Morristown, New Jersey 07960, 
USA. E-mail: gennaro.giustino@atlantichealth.org.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Reddy VY, Doshi SK, Kar S, et al. 5-year out-
comes after left atrial appendage closure: from 
the PREVAIL and PROTECT AF trials. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017;70:2964–2975.
2. Holmes DR Jr, Doshi SK, Kar S, et al. Left atrial 
appendage closure as an alternative to warfarin 
for stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation: a 
patient-level meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;65:2614–2623.
3. Holmes DR Jr, Alkhouli M, Reddy V. Left 
atrial appendage occlusion for the unmet 
clinical needs of stroke prevention in non-
valvular atrial fibrillation. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2019;94:864–874.
4. Simard T, Jung RG, Lehenbauer K, et al. Pre-
dictors of device-related thrombus following 
percutaneous left atrial appendage occlusion. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:297–313.
5. Saw J, Holmes DR, Cavalcante JL, et al. SCAI/ 
HRS expert consensus statement on transcatheter
left atrial appendage closure. JACC Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2023;16:1384–1400.
6. Qintar M, Wang DD, Lee J, et al. Transcatheter 
vacuum-assisted left-sided mass extraction with 
the AngioVac system. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2022;100:628–635.
7. Gerosa G, Longinotti L, Bagozzi L, et al. 
Transapical aspiration of a mitral mass with the 
AngioVac system on a beating heart. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2020;110:e445–e447.
8. Stimpfle F, Müller K, Geisler T, et al. Throm-
boembolic risk reduction via transseptal thrombus 
aspiration in a patient with spontaneous left atrial 
thrombus and stroke. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2017;10:e57–e59.
9. Hennawi HA, Srivastava S, Abulshamat A, 
Qintar M. The MICHIGAN procedure. JACC Case 
Rep. 2024;29:102448.
10. Giustino G, Koulogiannis K, Blitz L, et al. First-
in-Human percutaneous transseptal retrieval of
embolized transcatheter valve in the left 
ventricle. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2025;18:1591– 
1594.
11. Karunanandaa A, Patel N, Wong P, et al. Novel 
use of the ONO retrieval system for intracardiac 
thrombectomy in a high-risk pediatric patient. 
J Soc Cardiovasc Angiogr Interv. 2023;2:100976.
12. Herron C, Batlivala SP, Shahanavaz S. Right 
atrial thrombus removal with use of the ON  
O
retrieval device. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2023;102:1105–1108.
KEY WORDS complete embolic protection, 
device related thrombus, left atrial 
appendage closure device, vacuum-assisted 
mechanical thrombectomy
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 6 
Asselin et al
M A R C H 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 9 2 8 
Transcatheter Removal of Device-Related Thrombus
7
