
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
HOW WE DID IT
Buckling Under Pressure
Evolut FX Delivery System Malfunction
and Failure to Recapture During TAVR
Ahmed Ghoneem, MD,a Mubashir Mumtaz, MD,b Paul D. Mahoney, MDc
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVE We present a case of transcatheter aortic valve replacement in a 70-year-old woman with severe bicuspid
aortic valve stenosis complicated by incomplete recapture of the Evolut valve and buckling of the delivery system.
KEY STEPS Our key steps included the following: 1) unsuccessful withdrawal of the buckled delivery system and valve
into the inline sheath; 2) transradial snaring of the delivery system, followed by traction from both ends to reduce the
amount of buckling; and 3) once elongated as much as possible, the malfunctioning Evolut delivery system and valve
were removed as a unit over the wire.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS Aortic, iliac, or femoral injury: Reliant balloon was placed in the distal aorta use in case of
arterial rupture.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES The Evolut delivery system can buckle and accordion under tension in complex aortic
anatomy. A technique of snaring from above and tension from below can mitigate the buckled area and allow removal of
the damaged delivery system via the endovascular route. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103197) © 2025 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
W
e present a case of transcatheter aortic
valve replacement (TAVR) in a 70-year-
old woman with severe bicuspid aortic
valve stenosis complicated by accordion-like buck-
ling of the valve delivery sheath, resulting in incom-
plete recapture of the self-expanding Evolut valve.
This is a complication that has not been previously re-
ported, and we report a novel approach to manage
this complication.
CASE SUMMARY
The case was a 70-year-old woman with severe,
symptomatic bicuspid aortic valve stenosis (mean
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 The Evolut delivery system can buckle and
accordion under tension in complex aortic
anatomy. A technique of snaring from above
and tension from below can mitigate a
buckled Evolut Fx delivery system and allow
system removal via the endovascular route.
 Vascular and/or injury are potential compli-
cations of removing a damaged delivery
system using this technique; precautions to
manage these serious complications should
be taken.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103197
From the aDepartment of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (Harrisburg), Harrisburg, Pennsyl-
vania, USA; bDepartment of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (Harrisburg), Harrisburg, Pennsyl-
vania; and the cDepartment of Cardiovascular Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received October 15, 2024; revised manuscript received November 12, 2024, accepted November 21, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
gradient:
53
mm
Hg,
aortic
valve
area:
0.7 cm2, dimensionless valve index: 0.21).
Coronary
angiography
revealed
non-
obstructive coronary artery disease. Her So-
ciety
of
Thoracic
Surgeons
score
was
calculated at 4%. After a heart team evalua-
tion and taking the patient’s wishes to avoid surgical
aortic valve replacement into consideration, she was
deemed a candidate for TAVR. Computed tomogra-
phy angiography assessment demonstrated a hori-
zontal valve (with a perimeter of 71.3 mm and an area
of 389 mm2) and no obvious evidence of aortopathy
(Figure 1). A 26 mm Evolut FX valve (Medtronic Inc)
was planned.
PROCEDURAL STEPS
We proceeded with TAVR in a standard fashion. An 8-
F arterial and a 7-F arterial sheath were placed in the
right
femoral
artery
(RFA)/left
femoral
artery,
respectively, using a Seldinger technique under ul-
trasound guidance. A 6-F sheath was placed in the left
femoral vein. A pigtail catheter was placed in the
aorta. A temporary pacing wire was advanced to the
right ventricle via the left femoral vein sheath and
thresholds conﬁrmed. A Perclose device (Abbott) was
then deployed in the fashion of preclosure with knot
tagged to the drape. A J wire was placed through the
Perclose device, and a 14-F sheath was advanced
FIGURE 1
Case Plan
Computed tomography angiography showing (A) aortic annular dimensions, (B) bicuspid aortic valve anatomy with heavy calciﬁcations, and
(C) aortography showing a horizontal valve with no associated aortopathy. LC ¼ left cusp; NC ¼ non-coronary cusp; RAO ¼ right anterior
oblique; RC ¼ right cusp.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
RFA = right femoral artery
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Ghoneem et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Buckling Under Pressure
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 7
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
through the RFA access site. An AL 1 catheter was
placed over the J wire, and the aortic valve was
crossed using a stiff wire. A Double Curved Lunder-
quist wire (Cook Medical) was placed in the left
ventricle, and the catheter was removed. Balloon
predilation was then performed using a 20-mm True
Balloon (BD Medical).
Next, the native valve was crossed using the
Evolut
valve
with
some
difﬁculty.
Speciﬁcally,
resistance was felt at the region of the sinotubular
junction and at the valve requiring wire manipula-
tion and increased forward pressure to cross the
valve. The force required was not felt to be exces-
sive, and we successfully crossed the valve within
30 seconds and therefore did not consider another
balloon predilation. No deformities to the delivery
system were noted at that point. The Evolut valve
was then unsheathed slowly under direct ﬂuoro-
scopic guidance using pigtail position and angiog-
raphy as needed. Rapid pacing was performed. The
valve
was
then
unsheathed
to
the
2/3
position
rapidly.
Valve
position
was
then
assessed
by
aortography in the cusp overlap and 3 cusp views.
The initial Evolut valve position was felt to be
suboptimal when unsheathed to the 80% position,
with the valve being aortic in position (Video 1). On
attempting to resheath the valve, however, signiﬁ-
cant resistance was encountered with rotation of
the handle, and the delivery system buckled and
appeared as an accordion-like structure with about
one-half of the Evolut valve outside the sheath
(Video 2). We attempted to overcome the resistance
with some additional force; however, clicking was
heard and no further attempts to resheath the valve
were made.
With careful traction, we were able to bring the
entire system back into the descending aorta. We
then tried withdrawal of the buckled delivery system
to a more distal position and pulled the valve into the
inline sheath, but this was unsuccessful and caused
VISUAL SUMMARY
Step-by-Step Sequence
(A) Initial unsatisfactory valve position, after which we reattempted to recapture. (B) Buckling (accordioning) of the delivery sheath (arrow) with attempts to recapture.
(C) Failed sheath recapture into the in-line sheath. (D) Snaring from above and traction from below to straighten the buckled sheath. (E) Reliant balloon in the distal
aorta to use in case of catastrophic rupture. (F) Pulling out the delivery system and valve as a unit via the femoral artery. (G) Root angiography. (H) CTA showing a
dissection ﬂap at the sinotubular junction. CTA ¼ computed tomography angiography.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Ghoneem et al
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 7
Buckling Under Pressure
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
more transient bunching of the delivery sheath at the
inline sheath with retraction (Video 3). It was clear we
would not be able to recapture the exposed valve into
the inline sheath. Given that the iliac and femoral
arterial anatomy was favorable with minimal disease
(Figure 2), we decided to attempt removal of the
entire system while minimizing the risk of iliac/
femoral artery disruption.
We therefore advanced a 6-F multipurpose guide
to the descending aorta via right radial access. Us-
ing a 30-mm gooseneck snare, we snared the Evolut
sheath delivery system to anchor it, then gently
applied
traction
from
both
ends
to
reduce
the
amount of buckling and elongate the delivery sys-
tem (Videos 4 and 5). Once we had elongated the
delivery system as much as able, we replaced the
snare with a pigtail catheter for immediate angiog-
raphy after removal of the Evolut valve/delivery
system
complex.
Given
the
risk
that
attempted
percutaneous removal of the system could lead to
iliofemoral
disruption,
we
also
upsized
the
left
femoral sheath to 14 F, and took a 12-F 20-mm
Reliant balloon (Medtronic) to the distal aorta for
aortic
occlusion
in
case
of
catastrophic
rupture
(Video 6).
Under ﬂuoroscopic and tactile guidance, we then
carefully removed the malfunctioning Evolut delivery
system and valve as a unit over the wire. This
came
out
of
the
femoral
access
site
smoothly
(Video 7). We immediately replaced an 18-F right
femoral sheath. Distal aortography conﬁrmed patent
femoral arteries bilaterally (Video 8). The RFA 18-F
sheath was then removed, and a Perclose knot was
delivered to the arteriotomy. The left femoral artery
14-F sheath was removed next, and a Perclose knot
was placed (Figure 3).
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
It is important to recognize that the incompletely
sheathed valve was ﬂaring out of the delivery cath-
eter, which created very sharp edges on the system.
FIGURE 2
Computed Tomography Angiography of the Aorta, Iliac, and Femoral Arteries
Favorable femoral and iliac arterial anatomy with a minimum diameter of 6 mm in the right external iliac artery.
Ghoneem et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Buckling Under Pressure
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 7
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
We therefore thought that attempting to remove the
system
en
bloc
via
the
femoral
arteries
would
potentially cause serious vascular injury (aorta or
iliac/femoral arteries), even with a relatively straight
catheter despite a buckled delivery system. This
snaring technique helped with resheathing as much
of the valve as possible, reducing the proﬁle of the
system before system removal.
Repeated attempts at recapturing the valve could
potentially result in intimal tears in the aorta, which
can progress to catastrophic aortic dissection. In fact,
root aortography in our case showed a small intimal
ﬂap at the level of the sinotubular junction, which was
also conﬁrmed with a computed tomography angio-
gram (Video 9). However, we think the intimal tear
could have occurred with forward pressure to cross the
valve initially rather than the attempts at valve
recapture, evidenced by the retrograde appearance of
the dissection.
The patient remained hemodynamically stable and
asymptomatic throughout the entire procedure. We
elected to abort the procedure and the patient suc-
cessfully underwent elective aortic root repair and
aortic valve replacement 3 days later. At 1-year
follow-up, the patient continues to do well, reporting
no heart failure symptoms, and the surveillance
echocardiogram revealed a well-functioning pros-
thetic aortic valve.
Although buckling of the delivery system is a pre-
viously unreported complication, it may be more
frequently
encountered
in
the
future
with
the
expanding indications of TAVR in patients with hos-
tile
aortic
valve
anatomies.
We
would
therefore
recommend this technique of snaring and traction in
similar situations to overcome the buckled catheter
and allow safe extraction of the system rather than
valve deployment at an inadequate depth, or possibly,
in the aorta. This technique could potentially be use-
ful in other cases of failure to recapture the valve,
such as a malfunctioning grip handle, inappropriate
valve loading, or severe valve infolding.
CONCLUSIONS
This case highlights a previously unreported compli-
cation of the Evolut Fx delivery system, where it can
buckle, or accordion, under tension in complex aortic
anatomy. This can lead to inability to resheath the
valve in the body, create sharp wings on the catheter,
and increase the risk for vascular injury. We report
the successful use of a technique of snaring from
above and tension from below to mitigate the buckled
area and remove the damaged delivery system via the
endovascular route. This technique has not been
previously reported.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Mahoney has served as a consultant for Medtronic and Edwards
Lifesciences. All other authors have reported that they have no re-
lationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Ahmed
Ghoneem, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (Harrisburg),
205
South
Front
Street,
Brady
Hall,
Suite
3C,
Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania
17105,
USA.
E-mail:
ghoneema@upmc.edu. X handle: @a_h_ghoneem.
KEY WORDS bicuspid, complication, Evolut, TAVR
APPENDIX For supplemental videos and a video summarizing the
case, please see the online version of this paper.
FIGURE 3
Equipment List
LFA ¼ left femoral artery; LFV ¼ left femoral vein; RFA ¼ right femoral artery;
TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Ghoneem et al
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 9 7
Buckling Under Pressure
5
