
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Dual Percutaneous Repair for 
Aortic Annulus Rupture After 
Balloon-Expandable TAVR
Charles Vidoni, MD, a Benoît Guillon, MD, a Romain Chopard, MD, PHD, a,b Giovanni Vitale, MD, c 
Anass El M’Aary, MD, d Nicolas Meneveau, MD, PHD, a,b Charles Monnin, MD, a Matthieu Besutti, MD a
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Aortic annulus rupture is a rare but life-threatening complication of transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (TAVR), often linked to balloon-expandable valves and anatomic risk factors.
CASE SUMMARY An 85-year-old man with severe aortic stenosis underwent successful transfemoral TAVR. Two hours 
later, he developed tamponade because of a supra-annular rupture. A second, higher-positioned valve was implanted, 
followed by a third prosthesis after valve migration. Days later, a subannular rupture with pseudoaneurysm was iden-
tified. Coil embolization via radial access achieved complete exclusion.
DISCUSSION Annulus rupture may occur at various levels (supra-, intra, or subannular) and requires individualized 
management. This case highlights a staged rupture progression and successful percutaneous management, offering a 
less invasive alternative for high-risk patients.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Annulus rupture is a rare but critical TAVR complication. Rapid diagnosis and multidisciplinary 
coordination are essential. Percutaneous strategies, including valve-in-valve and coil embolization, may be lifesaving in 
selected cases. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105350) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 85-year-old patient was referred to our center 
for the management of symptomatic degenerative 
aortic disease, presenting with severe aortic steno-
sis (mean gradient: 46 mm Hg, aortic valve area: 
0.9 cm 2 ) and moderate aortic regurgitation. The 
patient presented with a minimally calcified 
tricuspid aortic valve. Pre-transcatheter aortic valve
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Annulus rupture is a rare but critical TAVR 
complication.
• Rapid 
diagnosis 
and 
multidisciplinary 
coordination are essential.
• Percutaneous strategies, including valve-in-
valve and coil embolization, may be life-
saving in selected cases.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105350
From the a Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Besancon, Besancon, France; b SINERGIES, University of Burgundy 
Franche-Comté, Besancon, France; c Department of Interventional Neuroradiology, Jean Minjoz University Hospital, Besancon, 
France; and the d Department of Radiology, Jean Minjoz University Hospital, Besancon, France.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received June 19, 2025; revised manuscript received July 30, 2025, accepted August 5, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
replacement (TAVR) computed tomography 
(CT) scan showed no evidence of calcifica-
tion at the level of the left ventricular 
outflow tract (LVOT) or the sinus of Val-
salva, making the patient eligible for a 
TAVR procedure. According to the Edwards 
sizing chart, a 29-mm SAPIEN 3 valve 
(Edwards Lifesciences) was recommended 
for a perimeter-derived annular area of 
580 mm 2 , which falls within the midrange for this 
size (Figure 1). 
Iliofemoral anatomy allowed transfemoral access. 
The patient underwent successful implantation of a 
29-mm SAPIEN 3 transcatheter aortic valve using 
nominal balloon inflation volume, without addi-
tional volume, via the transfemoral route without 
immediate complications (Video 1). Two hours after 
the procedure, the patient experienced syncope
with hemodynamic instability. Transthoracic echo-
cardiography revealed cardiac tamponade.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient has a history of hypertension and dysli-
pidemia. He has chronic coronary syndrome with 
preserved left ventricular ejection fraction and un-
derwent left anterior descending artery and distal 
right coronary artery stenting in 2021. Follow-up 
angiography in 2025 showed favorable percutaneous 
coronary interventions results.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Hemodynamic instability was not attributable to pe-
ripheral bleeding because there was no groin hema-
toma at the puncture site, and no abdominal pain or
VISUAL SUMMARY Dual Percutaneous Repair After TAVR Rupture
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
LVOT = left ventricular
outflow tract
PSA = pseudoaneurysm
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Vidoni et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5
Dual Percutaneous Repair After TAVR Rupture 
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 5 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
signs of leg ischemia. No significant rhythm compli-
cations occurred after the procedure, aside from a 
new-onset left bundle branch block.
INVESTIGATIONS
After percutaneous pericardial drainage and stabili-
zation of the patient, an emergency thoracic CT scan 
angiography was performed. It revealed a rupture of 
the aortic annulus at the level of the left coronary
sinus (supra-annular) with a feeding pseudoaneur-
ysm (PSA). The scan did not show any active peri-
cardial bleeding (Figure 2, Video 2).
MANAGEMENT
The case was urgently discussed with the heart team 
to determine the optimal therapeutic approach. 
Given the associated very high operative risk (Euro-
SCORE II: 54.9%), a percutaneous treatment
FIGURE 1 Preprocedural Computed Tomography Scan
(A) Assessment of the landing zone at the level of the sinuses of Valsalva, the aortic annulus, and the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) showing no major 
calcification. (B) Dimensions of the sinuses of Valsalva. (C) Dimensions of the aortic annular plane. (D) Dimensions of the LVOT. Avg = average; Max = maximum; 
LC = left coronary sinus; Min = minimum; NC = non-coronary sinus; RC = right coronary.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5 
Vidoni et al
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 5 0 
Dual Percutaneous Repair After TAVR Rupture
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
approach was chosen. The patient was transferred to 
a hybrid operating room for coverage of the entry 
point of the left coronary sinus PSA, with a planned 
implantation of a second, higher-positioned aortic 
bioprosthesis. The patient developed respiratory 
distress with agitation and altered consciousness, 
requiring orotracheal intubation and hemodynamic 
support with norepinephrine.
First, the implantation of a second 26-mm SAPIEN 
3 prosthesis via a left femoral approach was unsuc-
cessful because the valve migrated to the junction 
between the ascending aorta and the aortic arch due 
to a left ventricular extrasystole during deployment 
(Video 3). Subsequently, a third self-expanding 29-
mm NAVITOR (Abbott Laboratories) aortic bio-
prosthesis was successfully implanted within the first 
aortic prosthesis (Video 4). Immediate angiographic 
control confirmed the absence of periprosthetic 
leakage and successful exclusion of the left coronary
sinus PSA. The pericardium remained dry throughout 
the procedure. The patient was then transferred to 
the intensive care unit for postoperative monitoring. 
After 24 hours of sedation, sedation was stopped, 
and the patient awoke without hypoxia and was 
extubated 
successfully. 
Catecholamines 
were 
tapered off and discontinued after 48 hours, allowing 
the patient to be transferred to the regular ward. The 
patient experienced an episode of complete atrio-
ventricular block, leading to the implantation of a 
dual-chamber pacemaker with selective left bundle 
area capture. The overall recovery was favorable, and 
the patient was discharged home 6 days after the 
procedure.
Two days later, the patient was readmitted 
with chest pain. A CT scan revealed a PSA fed by the 
LVOT. The patient remained clinically stable, and 
echocardiography confirmed that the pericardium 
remained dry Table 1.
FIGURE 2 3-Dimensional Computed Tomography Scan Showing the Supra-Annular Aortic Rupture
The supra-annular aortic rupture (arrows) and its relationship with adjacent structures are shown.
TABLE 1
Timeline
Date
Events
Day 0
An 85-year-old patient undergoes the implantation of a 29-mm Edwards SAPIEN 3 aortic bioprosthesis (TAVI) for severe aortic 
disease without immediate complications.
Day 0, H+2
Hemodynamic instability due to cardiac tamponade: managed with percutaneous drainage. CT scan revealed a breach of the left 
coronary sinus without active bleeding. Attempted implantation of a second 26-mm Edwards SAPIEN 3 aortic bioprosthesis was 
unsuccessful. A third NAVITOR aortic prosthesis was successfully implanted in a valve-in-valve higher position without 
complications. Successful closure of the entry point.
Day 3
Complete atrioventricular block: implantation of a dual-chamber Medtronic pacemaker with selective left bundle area capture.
Day 6
Discharge home.
Day 8
Hospitalization for chest pain: pseudoaneurysm fed by the left ventricular outflow tract.
Day 11
CT scan: 30% increase in pseudoaneurysm volume.
Day 16
Percutaneous closure of the periannular pseudoaneurysm with coil: successful.
Day 30
Discharge to rehabilitation care.
CT = computed tomography; TAVI = transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
Vidoni et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5
Dual Percutaneous Repair After TAVR Rupture 
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 5 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
A follow-up CT scan 3 days later showed that the 
PSA had increased in volume by approximately 30% 
(Figure 3, Video 5). The case was discussed again with 
the heart team.
Given the associated high surgical risk and the 
patient’s refusal of surgical intervention, a percuta-
neous treatment approach was chosen. Using a mini-
invasive 6-F retrograde left radial artery approach, 
the left heart chambers were catheterized, and a left 
ventricular loop was placed toward the ascending 
aorta using a J guidewire (Figure 4). A 110-cm Flexor 
sheath (COOK Medical) was mounted on the guide-
wire and progressively withdrawn to approach the 
LVOT. The PSA was then catheterized using a 0.018-
in Advantage (Terumo Corp) Glidewire. A 0.018-F 
Rubicon microcatheter (Boston Scientific Corp) was 
advanced over the guidewire to confirm correct 
positioning 
by 
injection 
under 
fluoroscopy. 
The guidewire was removed, and the largest coils 
(maximum 24 × 500 mm) were gradually deployed 
into the widest distal part of the PSA to exclude it 
(Figure 4).
After excluding the distal portion of the PSA, 
support became insufficient, and the catheters 
became unstable, resulting in nonselective catheter-
ization. The PSA was then recatheterized using a 
Choice PT guidewire (Boston Scientific), a 6-F 
Guidezilla II guide extension catheter (Boston Sci-
entific), and a Turnpike Spiral microcatheter (Tele-
flex) setup. Smaller coils (minimum 6 × 200 mm) 
were then progressively deployed until the PSA was 
completely excluded (Figure 5, Video 6).
The final left ventricular angiogram confirmed 
complete exclusion of the PSA without contrast 
leakage (Figure 5, Video 6). The radial puncture site 
was externally compressed with a TR Band 
(Terumo).
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient was discharged to rehabilitation care af-
ter 15 days of uncomplicated clinical and echocar-
diographic monitoring.
DISCUSSION
Aortic annulus rupture is considered a major vascular 
complication by the Valve Academic Research Con-
sortium 3 (VARC-3). 1 It is rare (0.5%-1% of TAVR 
cases), but it is associated with a high mortality rate 
(approximately 50%). 2 Injury to the aortic root or 
LVOT can occur during balloon dilation of the native
FIGURE 3 3-Dimensional Computed Tomography Scan of the Subannular Aortic Rupture
The pseudoaneurysm (subannular aortic rupture) and its relationship with adjacent structures are shown.
FIGURE 4 Photograph Demonstrating the Use of the Radial Artery Approach
Photograph of the use of the left radial artery approach to exclude pseudoaneurysm.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5 
Vidoni et al
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 5 0 
Dual Percutaneous Repair After TAVR Rupture
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
aortic valve, prosthetic valve deployment, or valve 
redilation for paravalvular leakage.
Clinical and procedural factors that increase the 
risk of aortic root rupture include female sex, small 
and ellipsoid annuli (<20 mm), heavily calcified 
leaflets, asymmetrical calcifications, LVOT calcifica-
tions, narrow aortic root anatomy, an aggressive 
treatment strategy (eg, oversizing, defined as fol-
lows: [(prosthesis area/aortic root area − 
1) × 
100] $20%), and postdilatation. 3-6 Furthermore, this 
complication is most commonly linked to the use of 
balloon-expandable 
valves 
(rather 
than 
self-
expendable valves). Therefore, a precise preproce-
dural analysis of the device landing zone is essential. 
In this case, none of the traditional risk factors were
present except for the use of a balloon-expandable 
prosthesis.
The term device landing zone offers a more accurate 
understanding of the different pathophysiological 
types of rupture than the term aortic annulus rupture 
itself. 5 It provides a detailed description of the various 
damage types associated with bioprosthesis implan-
tation, distinguishing between intra-annular, supra-
annular, subannular (divided into myocardial free 
wall, interventricular wall, and below the left coronary 
artery), and combined damage. 5 This concept helps 
explain the heterogeneous clinical presentations and 
the various treatment options available.
The treatment strategy may be purely medical, 
surgical, or percutaneous, but it must be determined
FIGURE 5 Fluoroscopic Images of the Percutaneous Exclusion of the Pseudoaneurysm
Key steps in the exclusion procedure, including (A) left chamber catheterization, (B) pseudoaneurysm catheterization, (C) confirmation of the correct positioning by 
injection under fluoroscopy, (D) filling the distal part with large coils, (E) filling the proximal part with small coils, and (F) final left ventricular angiogram confirming 
complete exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm without contrast leakage.
Vidoni et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5
Dual Percutaneous Repair After TAVR Rupture 
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 5 0
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
quickly, with close coordination between the heart 
team members. Initially, optimized medical treat-
ment includes the complete reversal of periproce-
dural anticoagulation. Correction of the blood 
coagulopathy should be implemented. If there is 
intrapericardial bleeding with signs of tamponade, 
percutaneous or surgical drainage should be per-
formed. Some successful cases have been reported, 7 
but the outcomes of this conservative strategy are 
unpredictable and should only be considered when 
there is rapid hemodynamic stabilization.
Emergency sternotomy with rupture repair, 
possibly including extraction of the bioprosthesis 
and placement of a new surgical prosthesis, appears 
to be the gold standard treatment in cases of hemo-
dynamic instability. 5
Reports on percutaneous management of this 
complication remain scarce in the literature. This 
management may be beneficial for high-risk patients, 
given the major surgical risks and the potential 
perioperative morbidity and mortality linked to 
aortic ring ruptures. 2
The first complication was a supra-annular rupture 
with a breach in the left coronary sinus, leading to 
cardiac tamponade. Because the antero-left sinus 
appeared to be compressed by the stent of the first 
bioprosthesis, the first step of the strategy was to 
stabilize the cusps of the initial valve in a higher 
position to seal the rupture site by completely 
excluding the antero-left sinus. 8 The second stage
involved a subannular rupture with a breach through 
the free wall of the subaortic myocardium, which led 
to the formation of an evolving subpericardial PSA. 
The objective was to stop the PSA from progressing 
because it could have ruptured into the pericardial 
space. We decided to exclude the PSA by inserting 
coils. This method induces thrombosis, which pre-
vents the PSA from filling and expanding with each 
systole. 9 Finally, exclusion of this type of PSA can 
also be attempted using a plug. 10
CONCLUSIONS
Aortic annulus rupture is a rare but life-threatening 
complication of the now widely performed TAVR 
procedure. To our knowledge, we report the first 
documented case of successful dual percutaneous 
management of both supra-annular and subannular 
annular rupture.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships to disclose 
relevant to the contents of this paper.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Charles
Vidoni, Department of Cardiology, University Hospi-
tal Besançon, 3 Boulevard Alexandre Fleming 25000, 
Besançon, France. E-mail: cvidoni@chu-besancon.fr. 
X handle: @v_vidoni.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Généreux P, Piazza N, Alu MC, et al. Valve Ac-
ademic Research Consortium 3: updated endpoint 
definitions for aortic valve clinical research. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2021;77(21):2717–2746.
2. Rodgers V, Gobeil F, Noiseux N, et al. Con-
tained rupture of the aortic annulus after trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation: uncommon 
presentation of a rare complication. Can J Cardiol. 
2014;30(6):696.e5-e7.
3. Reiter C, Grund M, Nahler A, Steinwender C, 
Lambert T. Rupture of the aortic root: a rare but 
life-threatening complication of transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 
2017;129(23-24):906–909.
4. Barbanti M, Yang TH, Rodès Cabau J, et al. 
Anatomical and procedural features associated 
with aortic root rupture during balloon-
expandable transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment. Circulation. 2013;128(3):244–253.
5. Pasic M, Unbehaun A, Buz S, Drews T, Hetzer R. 
Annular rupture during transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement. JACC: cardiovascular interventions. 
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8(1):1–9.
6. Reinöhl J, Psyrakis D, Kaier K, et al. Aortic root 
volume is associated with contained rupture of 
the aortic annulus in balloon-expandable trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement. Catheter Car-
diovasc Interv. 2016;87(4):807–817.
7. Hioki H, Watanabe Y, Kawashima H, Kozuma K. 
Serial CT images of annulus rupture treated by 
conservative strategy after transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2022;15(15):e179–e180.
8. Thimon T, Molina-Martin De Nicolas J, 
Lapeyre M, Tchetche D. Annulus rupture post 
transcatheter aortic valve implantation compli-
cated by a giant pseudoaneurysm. Euro-
Intervention. 2017;12(15):e1857.
9. Chiang M, Gonzalez PE, Villablanca PA, et al. 
Aorto-left ventricular fistula from aortic pseu-
doaneurysm after TAVR. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2022;15(11):e131–e133.
10. Unzué L, García E, Romero-Castro MJ. Percu-
taneous repair of TAVI induced aortic pseudoa-
neurysm. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2021;74(6): 
546.
KEY WORDS acute heart failure, aortic 
valve, computed tomography, imaging, 
left-sided catheterization, valve repair
APPENDIX For supplemental
videos, please see the online version of this 
paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 2 , 2 0 2 5 
Vidoni et al
O C T O B E R 1 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 3 5 0 
Dual Percutaneous Repair After TAVR Rupture
7
