
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Transcatheter Closure of an LVOT to 
LA Fistula After Aortic Bioprosthetic 
Valve Fracture
Ramy Sedhom, MD, MS, Adeba Mohammad, DO, Anas Alani, MD, Purvi Parwani, MD, Antoine Sakr, MD, 
Jason Hoff, MD, Amr Mohsen, MD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Left ventricular outflow tract to left atrium (LVOT-LA) fistula is an uncommon but serious compli-
cation of transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), associated with adverse clinical outcomes.
CASE SUMMARY A 78-year-old man with a history of surgical aortic valve replacement, followed by valve-in-valve 
TAVR, presented with significant dyspnea thought to be due to a valve-in-valve patient prosthesis mismatch. He un-
derwent valve fracture of the TAVR valve. Post–balloon valvuloplasty, the patient developed an LVOT-LA fistula. He 
presented with worsening exertional dyspnea. Transesophageal echocardiography confirmed the fistula, and a percu-
taneous transvenous closure using an Amplatzer IV vascular plug was successfully performed. After the procedure, the 
patient’s symptoms markedly improved.
DISCUSSION Percutaneous closure of an LVOT-LA fistula is technically feasible when performed in experienced 
centers. Small, low-profile occlusion devices, such as the Amplatzer IV vascular plug, are preferred to minimize the risk 
of interference with adjacent valvar structures.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Intracardiac shunts are uncommon but serious complications of TAVR. Percutaneous closure 
is technically feasible when performed at experienced centers. (JACC Case Rep. 2026;31:106654) © 2026 The Authors. 
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under 
the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 78-year-old man presented to the structural cardi-
ology clinic for consultation for progressively wors-
ening dyspnea with exertion and extreme fatigue. He 
had a history of surgical aortic valve replacement, 
followed by valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (ViV TAVR) 3 years prior. This was
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Intracardiac shunts are uncommon but 
serious complications of transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement.
• Percutaneous closure is technically feasible 
when performed at experienced centers.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.106654
From the Division of Cardiology, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, California, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received June 10, 2025; revised manuscript received September 10, 2025, accepted September 16, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 1 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 6
ª 2 0 2 6 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
followed by bioprosthetic valve fracture of 
ViV TAVR, which was complicated by a left 
ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) to left 
atrium (LA) fistula. He had improvement in 
heart failure symptoms, but subsequently 
developed recurrent dyspnea. On examina-
tion, the patient was noted to have jugular 
venous distention, decreased bibasilar lung 
sounds, and 1+ bilateral pitting edema of the 
lower extremities.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient has a history of aortic stenosis status-
post 25 mm St Jude Medical Epic heart valve 
(St Jude Medical, Inc) (true internal dimension 
21 mm) 13 years prior, followed by ViV TAVR with a 
26-mm Edwards SAPIEN 3 bioprosthetic valve 9 years 
later because of structural valve degeneration. ViV 
TAVR was performed without valve fracture. Three 
months before the current presentation, the patient 
underwent balloon valvuloplasty with a 25-mm True 
balloon (4 mm greater than the internal diameter of 
the patient’s valve; Bard Vascular Inc) of the TAVR 
valve with valve fracture for a severe patient-
prosthesis mismatch (Figure 1). Balloon valvulo-
plasty was complicated by an LVOT-LA fistula seen in 
mitral-aortic intervalvular fibrosa with supra-annular 
mitral regurgitation identified immediately after
bioprosthetic valve fracture, with a plan for watchful 
waiting because the patient was asymptomatic at the 
time. He also had decompensated heart failure with a 
left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% to 45%, 
moderate functional tricuspid regurgitation, hyper-
tension, hyperlipidemia, chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease, and patent foramen ovale.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for dyspnea includes 
increased shunting from the LVOT-LA fistula, wors-
ening heart failure, worsening aortic valve function, 
or primary lung pathology.
INVESTIGATIONS
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was per-
formed to further understand the valvar pathology 
and fistula. TEE revealed an LVOT-LA fistula via the 
zone of mitral-aortic intervalvular fibrosa or fibrous 
curtain below the posterior aortic cusp, close to the 
lateral trigone, with at least moderate supra-annular 
mitral regurgitation with 3-dimensional vena con-
tracta of 0.35 cm 2 and 2-dimensional vena contracta 
of 0.4 cm (Figure 2). There was trace mitral regurgi-
tation through the native valve. The mean gradient 
across the bioprosthetic aortic valve was 11 mm Hg, 
with no paravalvular leak.
VISUAL SUMMARY Case Timeline
AoV = aortic valve; AVP 4 = Amplatzer IV vascular plug; LA = left atrium; LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract; SAVR = surgical aortic valve 
replacement; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement; ViV = valve-in-valve.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AVP IV = Amplatzer IV
vascular plug
LA = left atrium
LVOT = left ventricular
outflow tract
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
ViV = valve-in-valve
Sedhom et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 6
Transcatheter Closure of an LVOT-LA Fistula 
F E B R U A R Y 2 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 6 5 4
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
MANAGEMENT
The patient was evaluated by a multidisciplinary 
approach, with input from structural cardiology and 
cardiac imaging teams. Closure was indicated because 
of symptomatic heart failure from a hemodynamically 
significant LVOT-to-LA shunt, with elevated left ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure on invasive assess-
ment. Given the patient’s high surgical risk and 
favorable anatomy on TEE, percutaneous transseptal 
closure with a low-profile device was the preferred 
approach. A 10-F short sheath was placed in the right 
common femoral vein. A mid and posterior transseptal 
puncture under TEE guidance was performed using 
the standard technique to allow for maximum 
maneuverability of the wire. The catheter was 
advanced to the LA. Heparin anticoagulation was 
administered, and the activated clotting time 
was maintained within the therapeutic range. A tele-
scoping system of an 8.5-F Agilis steerable guide 
catheter (Abbott), a 5-F multipurpose diagnostic 
catheter, and an angled glide wire were used to cross 
the paravalvular defect from the LA. The wire and the 
multipurpose catheter were advanced to the left 
ventricle (Figure 3). An 8-mm Amplatzer IV vascular 
plug (AVP IV) was positioned in the defect and then 
released (Figure 4A). Proper positioning was 
confirmed by fluoroscopy and TEE. Echocardiography
demonstrated resolution of the perivalvular leak 
(Figures 4B and 4C).
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient’s exertional dyspnea and heart failure 
symptoms improved significantly.
DISCUSSION
Iatrogenic intracardiac shunts are an uncommon 
clinical entity. It has been most frequently reported 
in association with surgical interventions involving 
the aortic root and/or aortic valve. 1 Nonetheless, 
fistula formation has also been reported after TAVR, 
where it is associated with increased morbidity and 
elevated mortality rates, particularly in the presence 
of heart failure. Contributing risk factors may include 
extensive perivalvular calcification, aggressive post-
dilatation, and low implantation. When such fistu-
lous communications occur, they most frequently 
involve the interventricular septum or extend from 
the aortic root to the right ventricle. Involvement of 
the LA is rare. 2 In the present case, the need for 
balloon angioplasty and valve fracture of a previously 
deployed ViV due to a patient-prosthesis mismatch 
likely contributed to the development of this 
complication.
FIGURE 1 Fluoroscopic Images of Balloon Valvuloplasty
(A) Pre–balloon valvuloplasty transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) valve. (B) Post–balloon valvuloplasty TAVR valve.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 6 
Sedhom et al
F E B R U A R Y 2 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 6 5 4 
Transcatheter Closure of an LVOT-LA Fistula
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
The clinical manifestation of such fistulas is typi-
cally dependent on the magnitude of left-to-right 
shunting, as reflected by the pulmonary/systemic 
flow ratio. Although many patients remain asymp-
tomatic, approximately 50% may develop symptoms 
of heart failure, hemolytic anemia, or embolic 
events. 2,3 In the present case, the patient had a left-
to-left shunt and experienced a recurrence of heart 
failure symptoms after an initial period of clinical 
improvement after TAVR.
Conservative management may be appropriate for 
asymptomatic patients. However, closure of the 
shunt is indicated in cases with progressive heart 
failure, right ventricular dilatation, or an increasing 
pulmonary/systemic flow ratio. Given that these pa-
tients are often high-risk surgical candidates, trans-
catheter closure represents a preferable therapeutic 
alternative. 2 In this case, the patient was at high
surgical risk because of advanced age and history of 
valve surgery.
Currently, there are no percutaneous devices spe-
cifically designed for the closure of iatrogenic intra-
cardiac shunts after TAVR. 2 However, percutaneous 
closure techniques using Amplatzer devices, coil 
embolization, and covered stents have been reported 
in the literature. 4 Small, low-profile occlusion de-
vices are preferred to minimize the risk of interfer-
ence with adjacent valvar structures and preserve 
valve function. 2 The AVP IV is a low-profile nitinol-
based embolization device designed for use with 
0.038-in guidewire-compatible diagnostic catheters. 
It is available in device diameters ranging from 4 to 
8 mm. The device is mounted on a 155-cm-long 
polytetrafluoroethylene–coated 
delivery 
wire, 
secured via a stainless steel microscrew mechanism. 
This configuration enables controlled deployment of
FIGURE 2 Transesophageal Echocardiogram
(A and B) LVOT-LA fistula via the zone of mitral-aortic intervalvular fibrosa (fibrous aortomitral curtain). (C and D) Three-dimensional 
rendering of the LVOT-LA fistula. Ao = aorta; LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract.
Sedhom et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 6
Transcatheter Closure of an LVOT-LA Fistula 
F E B R U A R Y 2 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 6 5 4
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
the plug by counterclockwise rotation of the delivery 
cable using the provided torque device. The plug can 
be recaptured and repositioned before the final 
release, allowing for optimal placement. 5 In our case, 
the defect was small in size and in close proximity to 
both the native mitral and transcatheter aortic valve 
leaflets. An 8-mm AVP IV was used because it can be 
deployed through any diagnostic catheter that can 
accommodate a 0.035-inch guidewire, such as a 4-F 
multipurpose catheter. In addition, because of the 
small size of the discs, there was no interaction be-
tween the device and the leaflet motion of both valves.
CONCLUSIONS
LVOT-LA fistula is an uncommon but serious 
complication of TAVR, associated with adverse 
clinical outcomes. Percutaneous closure is techni-
cally feasible when performed in experienced cen-
ters. The use of TEE for both preprocedural 
planning and intraprocedural guidance is essential 
to ensure procedural success. Small, low-profile 
occlusion devices, such as AVP IV, are preferred 
to minimize the risk of interference with adjacent 
valvar structures.
FIGURE 3 Crossing the Fistula
(A) Angled glide wire advanced through the fistula via transseptal puncture and LA on fluoroscopy. (B and C) TEE view of angled glide wire through the fistula into the 
LV. TEE = transesophageal echocardiographic; other abbreviations as in Figure 2.
FIGURE 4 Deployment of the Amplatzer Plug
(A) TEE view of the Amplatzer plug in the appropriate position with deployment of the distal disc. (B) TEE view showing the LV-LA fistula. (C) Appropriate position of 
the device with no residual leak on TEE. Abbreviations as in Figures 2 and 3.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 6 
Sedhom et al
F E B R U A R Y 2 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 6 5 4 
Transcatheter Closure of an LVOT-LA Fistula
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Amr Mohsen,
Division of Cardiology, Loma Linda University Med-
ical Center, 11234 Anderson St, Loma Linda, Califor-
nia 92354, USA. E-mail: AMohsen@llu.edu.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Dayco JS, Bell K, Alhusain R, Awadelkarim A, 
Baciewicz F, Cardozo S. Left ventricular outflow 
tract to left atrium fistula as a complication of 
aortic root repair. IHJ Cardiovasc Case Rep. 
2023;7(3):73–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ihjccr. 
2023.07.001
2. Rojas P, Amat-Santos IJ, Cortés C, et al. Ac-
quired aseptic intracardiac shunts following 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement: a sys-
tematic 
review. 
JACC 
Cardiovasc 
Interv. 
2016;9(24):2527–2538. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jcin.2016.09.034
3. Sammour Y, Chawla S, Tsutsui RS, Patel J, 
Harb S, Kapadia S. Transcatheter closure of left 
ventricular outflow tract–to–left atrium fistula. 
Case Rep. 2021;3(5):760–765.
4. Jainandunsing JS, Linnemann R, Bouma W, 
et al. Aorto-atrial fistula formation and closure:
a systematic review. J Thorac Dis. 2019;11(3): 
1031.
5. Lopera JE. The amplatzer vascular plug: review 
of evolution and current applications. Semin 
Intervent Radiol. 2015;32(4):356–369.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, 
echocardiography, valve replacement
Sedhom et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 6
Transcatheter Closure of an LVOT-LA Fistula 
F E B R U A R Y 2 5 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 6 5 4
6
