
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
BEYOND THE GUIDELINES
Fibrinolysis for Apical Thrombus as a 
Bridge to Emergent Valve-in-Valve 
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
Nicholas J. Valle, DO, a Omar A. Saleh, BS, b Mani C. Akunuri, MD, b Parth K. Parikh, MD, c Joshua A. Cohen, MD, c 
Deepak R. Talreja, MD, c Matthew R. Summers, MD c
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Left ventricular (LV) thrombus is traditionally a contraindication to transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement due to embolic risk. Consequently, management of valvular cardiogenic shock complicated by LV thrombus 
identifies unique challenges that require innovative strategies.
CASE SUMMARY A 58-year-old woman with critical bioprosthetic aortic stenosis, cardiogenic shock, and large LV 
thrombus (2.8 × 2.6 cm) underwent successful valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement after systemic 
fibrinolysis bridge therapy.
WHY BEYOND THE GUIDELINES Current guidelines contraindicate transcatheter aortic valve replacement in pa-
tients with LV thrombus. This case demonstrates the novel use of low-dose, slow infusion tissue plasminogen activator 
as a bridge therapy to enable life-saving intervention.
DISCUSSION Pulsed delivery of small doses of systemic fibrinolytic with hemodynamic and echocardiographic moni-
toring may be suitable as a bridge to definitive management in valvular shock patients with LV thrombus. Minimizing 
instrumentation during structural heart procedures complicated by LV thrombus is critical.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Low-dose, slow-infusion fibrinolysis coupled with echocardiographic monitoring may 
serve as bridge therapy to urgent structural cardiology intervention in carefully selected patients with LV 
thrombus and cardiogenic shock. (JACC Case Rep. 2026;31:106066) © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on 
behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
L 
eft ventricular (LV) thrombus contraindicates 
transcatheter 
aortic 
valve 
replacement 
(TAVR) due to embolic risk. 1 However,
nonsurgical patients with valvular cardiogenic shock 
(CS) require urgent valve correction for survival. The
presence of LV thrombus complicates management, 
often prohibiting intervention despite the urgent 
need in cases of critical bioprosthetic degeneration. 
We present the novel use of tissue plasminogen acti-
vator (tPA) as bridge to valve-in-valve (ViV) TAVR in
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.106066
From the a Macon and Joan Brock Virginia Health Sciences at Old Dominion University, Eastern Viginia Medical School, Internal 
Medicine Residency Program, Norfolk, Virginia, USA; b Macon and Joan Brock Virginia Health Sciences at Old Dominion Uni-
versity, Eastern Viginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, USA; and the c Department of Cardiology, Sentara Medical Group, 
Sentara Health, Virginia Beach, Virginia, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received July 31, 2025; revised manuscript received October 8, 2025, accepted October 10, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6
© 2 0 2 6 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
a patient who presented with critical bio-
prosthetic stenosis and valvular CS compli-
cated by large LV thrombus.
CASE SUMMARY
A 58-year-old woman with a history of aortic 
regurgitation and ascending aortic aneurysm 
with combined surgical bioprosthetic aortic 
valve replacement (21-mm CE Magna Ease; 
Edwards) and aortic arch repair in 2011 pre-
sented to the hospital with progressively worsening 
dyspnea. Echocardiogram revealed critical aortic 
stenosis (peak velocity: 4.5 m/s, mean gradient: 
51 mm Hg) secondary to bioprosthetic degeneration, 
newly reduced ejection fraction (15%), and a mobile 
LV thrombus (2.8 × 2.6 cm, area: 7.28 cm 2 ) (Figure 1, 
Video 1). She subsequently developed valvular CS 
(cardiac index: 1.6).
Surgical risk was deemed prohibitive. Advanced 
heart failure therapies and transplant were de-
ferred due to cognitive assessment findings. 
ViV-TAVR with SENTINEL Cerebral Protection System 
(Boston Scientific) was then considered. At our cen-
ter’s multidisciplinary heart conference, fibrinolytic 
debulking of the thrombus as a bridge to intervention
was proposed. A protocol from the SAFE-PVT 
Trial (Surgery Compared to Fibrinolytic Therapy for 
Symptomatic Left-Sided Prosthetic Heart Valve 
Thrombosis) was adopted. 2 Fibrinolytic agent (tPA), 
dosage, duration of infusion, and interval between 
infusions were directly adopted from this trial proto-
col. The approach was discussed with the patient’s 
surrogate who elected to proceed.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Pulsed infusions of 25 mg tPA over 6 hours 
can effectively reduce LV thrombus burden 
in cardiogenic shock patients requiring ur-
gent structural intervention; however, 
fibrinogen monitoring should be 
incorporated.
• Small coronary balloons for true orifice 
predilation combined with intracardiac 
echocardiography guidance can facilitate 
safe valve-in-valve TAVR while minimizing 
thrombus disruption risk.
• The use of 2 cerebroembolic protection de-
vices to cover all major branches of the 
aortic arch may benefit patients undergoing 
high-risk transcatheter heart procedures.
FIGURE 1 Echocardiographic Projections With and Without Contrast Highlighting Thrombus Size at Baseline (2.8 × 2.6 cm) and After the First (3.4 × 1.02 cm) 
and Second (2.03 × 0.8 cm) 25 mg tPA Infusions
The third dose of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) was stopped early due to right upper extremity hematoma, and an additional echocardiogram was not obtained.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AI = artificial intelligence
CS = cardiogenic shock
LV = left ventricular
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
tPA = tissue plasminogen
activator
ViV = valve-in-valve
Valle et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6
Fibrinolysis for LV Thrombus as a Bridge to Emergent ViV TAVR 
J A N U A R Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 0 6 6
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
A total of three 6-hour pulsed infusions of 25 mg 
tPA were attempted. The first dose successfully 
reduced thrombus dimensions by 52% to an area of 
3.468 cm 2 (3.4 × 1.02 cm) (Figure 1, Video 2) without 
complication. After echocardiogram had been ob-
tained, a second infusion was administered and was 
well tolerated. During infusion of the third dose, the 
patient developed a right upper extremity hema-
toma, and the infusion was stopped. Our final pre-
procedural echocardiogram was notable for a further 
decline in thrombus size to an area of 1.624 cm 2 
(2.03 × 0.8 cm) (Figure 1, Video 3).
The patient underwent TAVR protocol computed 
tomography angiography the year before her acute 
presentation before being lost to follow-up. Given 
low right coronary height (9.78 mm), our team 
leveraged artificial intelligence (AI)–guided pre-
procedural simulation and computational modeling 
(DASI Simulations) to improve our assessment of the 
patient’s risk of coronary obstruction and need for 
leaflet modification (Figures 2 and 3). A 23-mm Med-
tronic Evolute FX+ was chosen in part due to favor-
able AI modeling outputs that indicated a low right 
coronary artery obstruction risk without leaflet
FIGURE 2 Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement Protocol Computed Tomography Angiography Images With Planning Data for 
Valve-in-Valve Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
The RCA height was <10 mm (9.78), indicating increased risk of CO. RCA VTc and VTstj were 0.6.00 mm and 4.46, respectively. Also shown 
are left main trunk height (10.6 mm), VTc (5.87 mm), and VTstj (5.71 mm). CTA = computed tomography angiography; LC = left coronary; 
LMT = left main trunk; RC = right coronary; RCA = right coronary artery; VTc = virtual transcatheter heart valve-to-coronary distance; 
VTstj = virtual transcatheter heart valve-to-sinotubular junction distance.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6 
Valle et al
J A N U A R Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 0 6 6 
Fibrinolysis for LV Thrombus as a Bridge to Emergent ViV TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
modification (Distance from native aortic valve Leaflet 
Cusp to coronary ostium/coronary artery diameter 
[DLC/d] RCA = 2.87) (Figure 3). 3 ViV TAVR was then 
performed in a hybrid operating room. Bilateral radial 
arteries were occluded from prior procedures; thus, 
the bilateral ulnar arteries were accessed for dual 
SENTINEL device placement. The right-sided device 
was deployed first in typical fashion. The left-sided 
device was then deployed via the left ulnar artery. 
The proximal filter was rested in the left subclavian
artery with the distal filter left undeployed (Figure 4). 
Although the patient’s bioprosthetic degeneration 
limited our catheter advancement across the true 
orifice, we were ultimately able to traverse the 
degenerated valve with a Glidewire (Terumo) and 
predilate the bioprosthesis orifice with a 4.0-mm 
Charger balloon (Boston Scientific). This technique 
facilitated subsequent LV access with a multipurpose 
angiographic catheter that was exchanged for a Safari 
wire 
(Boston 
Scientific). 
Biplane 
intracardiac
FIGURE 3 DASI Preprocedural Modeling Analysis Based on the Patient’s Pre-Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement Computed 
Tomography Angiography Data
The DLC/d ratio is shown for both the right coronary artery (2.87) and left main trunk (3.21). A DLC/d # 0.7 is associated with increased 
incidence of coronary obstruction. 3 Balloon-expandable and self-expanding valves of various sizes were tested. A 23-mm self-expanding 
valve was ultimately chosen because it had the most favorable expected hemodynamics and CO risk profile. Given these findings, leaflet 
modification was not planned. CO = coronary artery occlusion; CTA = computed tomography angiography; d = coronary artery diameter; 
DLC = distance from native aortic valve leaflet to coronary ostium; Hrel = relative leaflet height.
Valle et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6
Fibrinolysis for LV Thrombus as a Bridge to Emergent ViV TAVR 
J A N U A R Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 0 6 6
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
echocardiography (Phillips) was used in conjunction 
with an right anterior oblique projection to provide a 
longitudinal view of the LV apex, enhancing our abil-
ity to monitor LV wire positioning near the thrombus 
(Figure 5, Video 4). The transvalvular gradient was 
measured at 80 mm Hg despite CS.
The valve delivery system was then advanced 
across the aortic valve. Predilation was deferred to 
minimize instrumentation. Due to the procedural 
complexity, we ultimately opted for a deployment 
depth of 6 mm to reduce the overall procedure time 
and to minimize the patient’s risk of LV thrombus 
dislodgement. The new valve was significantly con-
strained after deployment; as a result, we opted for 
postdilation with a 22-mm balloon (Figure 6). Post-
deployment gradients were <10 mm Hg with excel-
lent hemodynamics. Echocardiography revealed 
trivial paravalvular leak, and our final angiography 
showed no complications.
WHY BEYOND THE GUIDELINES
Current American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association guidelines contraindicate TAVR in 
patients with LV thrombus, recommending surgery or 
anticoagulation. There are no guidelines describing 
use of tPA for LV thrombus reduction as a bridge to 
TAVR in CS. Our case demonstrates a potential salvage 
therapy for high-risk patients who otherwise lack 
treatment options.
CASE OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
After ViV TAVR, the patient had no evidence of 
neurologic sequelae and was weaned off vasopressor 
and inotropic support by postprocedural day 3. 
Transthoracic echocardiography on day 12 showed LV 
ejection fraction improved to 30% with only trace 
paravalvular leak; the LV thrombus measured 
2.81 cm 2 . The patient was safely discharged home on 
anticoagulation.
DISCUSSION
The management of valvular CS complicated by LV 
thrombus presents a therapeutic dilemma. Current 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation guidelines contraindicate TAVR in the 
presence of LV thrombus due to embolic risk, rec-
ommending anticoagulation or surgical interven-
tion. 1 This case represents the first reported use of 
systemic fibrinolysis as a bridge to successful ViV 
TAVR in a patient with critical bioprosthetic stenosis, 
CS, and a large LV thrombus (Figure 7). 7
Our patient with severe aortic stenosis (mean 
gradient: 80 mm Hg), severely reduced LV function 
(ejection fraction: 10%-15%), large LV thrombus, and 
CS required emergent valve correction. Our fibrino-
lysis protocol, adapted from the SAFE-PVT trial, 2 
used pulsed doses of 25 mg tPA administered over 
6 hours. This approach differs markedly from con-
ventional tPA protocols for acute stroke or pulmo-
nary embolism, which use larger doses over shorter 
periods. 4,5 Our use of the protocol successfully 
reduced the patient’s thrombus area by 78% (from 
7.28 to 1.62 cm 2 ), potentially minimizing embolic risk 
during ViV TAVR. The development of an upper ex-
tremity hematoma during the third infusion un-
derscores the importance of monitoring fibrinogen 
levels, a modification we would recommend in future 
cases, because levels <220 mg/dL have been associ-
ated with elevated risk of severe bleeding. 6 
Previous reports have described successful TAVR 
in CS with LV thrombus using cerebral protection and
FIGURE 4 Radiographic Projection Demonstrating the Position of 2 SENTINEL 
Cerebroembolic Protection Devices With Baskets Deployed in the Brachiocephalic 
Trunk, Left Common Carotid Artery, and Left Subclavian Artery
The right-sided device was introduced via the right ulnar artery and deployed in the 
usual fashion. The left-sided device was introduced via the left ulnar artery. The 
proximal basket was then deployed within the left subclavian artery, and the distal 
basket was left undeployed.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6 
Valle et al
J A N U A R Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 0 6 6 
Fibrinolysis for LV Thrombus as a Bridge to Emergent ViV TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FIGURE 5 Intracardiac Echocardiography Visualization of Safari Wire Within the LV Cavity
Visualization of equipment during this case was imperative to minimize instrumentation of the left ventricular (LV) thrombus.
FIGURE 6 Evolute FX+ After Successful Deployment at 6-mm Depth
Initial constraint on the valve frame (left) was significantly improved with postdilation using a 22-mm balloon (right). Initial predilation was 
avoided to minimize instrumentation; however, postdilation became necessary given valve constrain after deployment.
Valle et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6
Fibrinolysis for LV Thrombus as a Bridge to Emergent ViV TAVR 
J A N U A R Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 0 6 6
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
intracardiac echocardiography guidance. 7 However, 
thrombus size was not mentioned in these cases. Chu 
et al 8 reported using tPA for bioprosthetic valve 
thrombosis with initial success; however, their pa-
tient suffered cardiac arrest 48 hours posttreatment. 
Our case demonstrates that with careful patient se-
lection and close monitoring, fibrinolysis can serve as 
an effective bridge to definitive intervention.
The technical complexity of this procedure was 
compounded by the patient’s bioprosthetic degen-
eration, making LV access challenging. We inten-
tionally deferred predilation of the degenerated 
valve to minimize instrumentation, with the goal of 
favorable hemodynamics on self-expanding valve 
deployment. Unfortunately, significant postdeploy-
ment valve constraint made postdilation unavoid-
able. We similarly chose to accept less than optimal 
valve deployment depth (6 mm) to reduce procedure 
time and reduce instrumentation near the thrombus. 
This procedural approach, coupled with intracardiac 
echocardiography for real-time visualization, mini-
mized thrombus manipulation while achieving 
acceptable valve deployment position. Our use of 
2 SENTINEL devices to provide total protection over 
the main aortic arch branches is not a widely 
described technique, and prospective data are 
needed to validate its utility, especially in procedures 
with high cardioembolic risk.
The integration of AI-guided preprocedural simu-
lation proved valuable for patient valve selection and 
coronary obstruction risk assessment. Because 
ViV TAVR procedures have inherently higher rates 
of intraprocedural modifications than native TAVR, 
advanced planning tools become particularly crucial 
in emergent and complex cases. 9 The ongoing
development of simulation-based valve selection 
technology may continue to optimize patient peri-
procedural planning, potentially reducing instru-
mentation in thrombus-complicated cases as in the 
case of our patient.
Our patient’s recovery, weaning from hemody-
namic support by day 3 and with postprocedural LV 
ejection fraction improvement from 15% to 30%, 
validates the potential of our approach in patients 
with limited options. Furthermore, our patient’s 
peak-to-peak gradient of 80 mm Hg despite her 
severely reduced ejection fraction suggested the 
significant potential for myocardial recovery after 
relief of valvular obstruction, which proved accurate.
CONCLUSIONS
This case demonstrates that low-dose, slow-infusion 
fibrinolysis can successfully bridge carefully selected 
patients with LV thrombus and CS to urgent ViV TAVR. 
The pulsed administration of 25 mg tPA over 6 hours, 
with close echocardiographic and hemodynamic 
monitoring, achieved substantial thrombus reduction 
while maintaining an acceptable safety profile. 
Coupled with our technique to minimize thrombus 
instrumentation, our approach enabled life-saving 
intervention in a patient without additional treat-
ment options. As structural heart interventions 
expand to increasingly complex patients, further 
studies are needed to establish the safety and efficacy 
of fibrinolytic protocols for LV thrombus management.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Publication fees were provided by Sentara Health, Virginia Beach, 
Virginia, USA. Dr Cohen receives consulting and proctoring income
FIGURE 7 Flowchart Outlining Preprocedural Planning and Medical Decision-Making
Administration of serial 6-hour infusions of 25 mg tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) was adopted from the protocol outlined in the SAFE-PVT Trial (Surgery 
Compared to Fibrinolytic Therapy for Symptomatic Left-Sided Prosthetic Heart Valve Thrombosis). 4 Serial echocardiograms were used to monitor thrombus response 
to each round of infusions. Multidisciplinary discussion throughout management was critical. The patient tolerated 2 rounds of tPA infusion. The third transfusion 
was halted on development of a right upper extremity hematoma. CTA = computed tomography angiography; EF = ejection fraction; LV = left ventricular;
LVEF = left ventricular ejection fraction; RCA = right coronary artery; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement; ViV-TAVR = valve-in-valve transcatheter 
aortic valve replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6 
Valle et al
J A N U A R Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 0 6 6 
Fibrinolysis for LV Thrombus as a Bridge to Emergent ViV TAVR
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
from Abbott Pharmaceuticals. Dr Talreja receives speaking, consul-
ting, and proctoring income from Medtronic, Abbott Pharmaceuti-
cals, Abiomed, Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Amgen. Dr 
Summers receives speaking, consulting, and proctoring income from 
Medtronic and Abbott Pharmaceuticals; and serves on the advisory 
board of Abbot Pharmaceuticals, Medtronic, Picardia, DASI, Shock-
wave, and Abiomed. All other authors have reported that they have 
no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Matthew R.
Summers, Sentara Medical Group, Structural Heart, 
Complex Coronary and Interventional Cardiology, 
Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, 600 Gresham Drive 
Suite 8630 A, Norfolk, Virginia 23507, USA. E-mail: 
mrsumme1@sentara.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Writing Committee Members. 2020 ACC/ 
AHA Guideline for the management of pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart 
Association 
joint 
committee 
on 
clinical practice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2021;77(4):e25–e197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jacc.2020.11.018
2. Devasenapathy N, Devagourou V, Hote MP, 
et al. Surgery compared to fibrinolytic therapy for 
symptomatic left-sided prosthetic heart valve 
thrombosis (SAFE-PVT): rationale and design of a 
randomized controlled trial. Indian Heart J. 
2024;76(3):192–196.
3. Heitkemper M, Hatoum H, Azimian A, et al. 
Modeling risk of coronary obstruction during 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc 
Surg. 
2020;159(3):829–838.e3. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs.2019.04.091
4. Hacke W, Kaste M, Brozman M, et al. Thrombol-
ysis with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours after acute ischemic
stroke. New Engl J Med. 2008;359(13):1317–1329. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0804656
5. Konstantinides SV, Meyer G, Becattini C, et al. 
2019 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and man-
agement of acute pulmonary embolism developed 
in collaboration with the European Respiratory 
Society (ERS). Eur Heart J. 2020;41(4):543–603. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehz405
6. Ranucci M, Pistuddi V, Baryshnikova E, Colella D, 
Bianchi P. Fibrinogen levels after cardiac surgical 
procedures: 
association 
with 
postoperative 
bleeding, trigger values, and target values. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2016;102(1):78–85. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.01.005
7. Blusztein D, Teng P, Deuse T, Mahadevan V, 
et al. Shock, thrombus, TAVR: a challenging TAVR 
with large left-ventricular thrombus. Can J Car-
diol. 2021;37(10):1668–1670. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.cjca.2021.06.008
8. Chu J, Nath N, Attanasio S. Thrombolysis for 
cardiogenic shock secondary to aortic bioprosthetic
valve-in-valve thrombosis. Cureus. 2022;14(12): 
e33141. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.33141
9. Sirset-Becker T, Clark A, Flaherty JD, et al. 
Modeling of valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic 
valve implantation after aortic root replacement 
using a 3-dimensional artificial intelligence al-
gorithm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2024;169(6): 
1684–1693.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtcvs. 
2024.06.024
KEY WORDS acute valve syndrome, aortic 
valve, cardiogenic shock, fibrinolysis, 
intracardiac echocardiography, TAVR, 
thrombus, valve-in-valve
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Valle et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 2 , 2 0 2 6
Fibrinolysis for LV Thrombus as a Bridge to Emergent ViV TAVR 
J A N U A R Y 1 4 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 0 6 6
8
