
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Strategic Reintervention With
Marked Oversizing and Overexpansion 
in TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic 
Paravalvular Leak
Makoto Saigan, MD, a, * Masaki Miyasaka, MD, PHD, a,b, * Keita Yoshiyama, MD, a Natsuko Satomi, MD, a 
Masaki Nakashima, MD, a Yusuke Enta, MD, a Yusuke Toki, MD, a Yoshiko Munehisa, MD, PHD, a 
Yukihiro Hayatsu, MD, c Norio Tada, MD, PHD a
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Paravalvular leak (PVL) is a common complication of surgical aortic valve replacement and may recur 
even after transcatheter plug closure.
CASE SUMMARY A 71-year-old man developed recurrent PVL with hemolytic anemia 4 years after plug closure after 
redo surgical aortic valve replacement with a 25-mm Carpentier-Edwards Perimount Magna Ease valve. Valve-in-valve 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement was performed using a 29-mm Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia valve (Edwards Lifescien-
ces). To achieve sufficient oversizing and annular apposition, a deliberately oversized valve was selected and deployed 
using balloon overfilling.
DISCUSSION We report the intentional use of an oversized Sapien 3 valve with deliberate overexpansion beyond the 
standard size recommended for a 25-mm Magna Ease valve. This strategy led to effective PVL sealing and the complete 
resolution of hemolysis.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Anatomy-guided valve oversizing, combined with intentional overexpansion, is pivotal 
to procedural success. This approach may be a viable treatment option for high-risk patients with recurrent PVL. 
(JACC Case Rep. 2026;31:106869) © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 71-year-old man with a bicuspid aortic valve 
(Sievers type 0) and moderate aortic stenosis with 
severe aortic regurgitation initially underwent sur-
gical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) with a 25-mm
CEP (Carpentier-Edwards Perimount) Magna Ease 
valve (Edwards Lifesciences) and concomitant 
ascending aortic replacement with a 24-mm Gel-
weave graft (Terumo Aortic).
Four years later, he developed hemolytic anemia 
and heart failure due to a paravalvular leak (PVL),
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2026.106869
From the a Department of Cardiology, Sendai Kousei Hospital, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan; b Department of Laboratory Medicine, The 
Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; and the c Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. *These 
authors contributed equally to this work and share first authorship.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received November 5, 2025; revised manuscript received December 9, 2025, accepted January 6, 2026.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6
ª 2 0 2 6 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
requiring redo SAVR using the same pros-
thesis and graft. One year after the repeat 
surgery, recurrent PVL was treated with 
percutaneous 
closure 
using 
an 
8-mm 
Amplatzer Vascular Plug (AVP) 4 (Abbott 
Vascular) to achieve temporary stabilization. 
Over the past month, he had been reho-
spitalized several times for worsening ane-
mia and heart failure. On examination, he 
had conjunctival pallor, mild jaundice, a 
decrescendo-diastolic murmur in the aortic 
area, and bilateral lower limb edema.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient’s medical history consisted of 
chronic kidney disease and hypertension.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Possible causes included autoimmune or drug-
induced hemolysis, infection, malignancy, pros-
thetic valve–related mechanical hemolysis, and 
microangiopathic processes. However, the chronic 
course, lack of infection or thrombocytopenia, and 
the known PVL made PVL-related hemolysis the most 
likely diagnosis.
INVESTIGATIONS
Upon admission, the patient’s vital signs were stable 
(heart rate: 67 beats/min; blood pressure: 101/ 
65 mm Hg). Laboratory evaluation revealed severe 
anemia (hemoglobin: 4.0 g/dL, hematocrit: 13.3%) 
with elevated mean corpuscular volume (119.8 fL), 
numerous 
schistocytes, 
marked 
reticulocytosis 
(27.7%), and significantly elevated lactate dehydro-
genase (1,152 U/L). Haptoglobin was undetectable. 
White blood cell and platelet counts were normal, 
and renal dysfunction was present (creatinine: 
2.74 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen: 88.8 mg/dL). 
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed 
preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (72%), 
with end-diastolic and end-systolic dimensions of 
58 mm and 34 mm, respectively, and severe PVL jets 
adjacent to the previously implanted AVP 4 (Figure 1, 
Video 1).
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) per-
formed before PVL closure with AVP confirmed that 
the bioprosthetic valve was implanted in a supra-
annular position with clear detachment from the 
native annulus (Figure 2). The native annulus 
measured 95.1 mm in circumference and had a 
cross-sectional area of 701 mm 2 , indicating a large 
annulus.
Subsequent 
aortography 
after 
plug 
closure 
demonstrated 
that 
the 
surgical 
bioprosthesis 
remained in a supra-annular position along with the 
previously implanted AVP 4, and the PVL was again 
visualized at the same site (Figure 3, Video 2).
MANAGEMENT
Upon admission, conservative management with 
transfusions and diuretics was initiated, but anemia 
and lactate dehydrogenase levels continued to 
worsen, and heart failure remained uncontrolled. 
Because this would have been a third open heart 
surgery, surgical risk was prohibitive (EuroSCORE II: 
21.34%). In addition, catheter maneuverability had 
been severely limited by the ascending aortic graft 
during the prior PVL closure, making repeat plug 
closure difficult. After a heart team evaluation, 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement was selected 
as the preferred strategy.
A 29-mm Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia (S3UR) valve 
(Edwards Lifesciences) was used to achieve sufficient 
sealing. Although a 26-mm valve is generally rec-
ommended for a 25-mm Magna Ease, the annular area 
was markedly large (701 mm 2 ), with supra-annular 
surgical valve implantation and broad detachment 
around the prior plug. Therefore, an intentionally 
oversized 29-mm S3UR valve was selected and over-
expanded to achieve adequate sealing.
The procedure was performed under general 
anesthesia via a transfemoral approach under trans-
esophageal echocardiographic guidance. The 29-mm 
S3UR valve was deployed with 10 mL of overfilling 
beyond the nominal volume, aligning the upper edge 
of the S3UR frame precisely with the upper edge of 
the surgical valve (“top-to-top” alignment). 
Postprocedural aortography showed a marked 
reduction in PVL (Figure 3, Video 2). Blood trans-
fusions were required until postoperative day 2, after 
which hemoglobin levels stabilized. TTE confirmed 
no significant residual PVL (Figure 4, Video 3). CTA 
demonstrated good apposition of the transcatheter 
heart valve (THV) to both the surgical bioprosthesis 
and the large native annulus, with complete coverage
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• A TAV-in-SAV can be a viable treatment 
option for recurrent PVL after failed plug
closure, especially in patients at high risk for
surgery.
• Oversizing and intentionally overexpanding
the transcatheter heart valve may help 
achieve effective sealing in cases with large 
annuli or previous plug placement.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AVP = Amplatzer Vascular
Plug
CTA = computed tomography
angiography
PVL = paravalvular leak
SAVR = surgical aortic valve
replacement
S3UR = Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia
TAV-in-SAV = transcatheter
aortic valve-in-surgical valve
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiography
Saigan et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6
TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak 
M A R C H 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 8 6 9
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
of the prior plug and mild inflow and outflow flaring 
(Figure 5). Anemia and heart failure improved, and 
the patient was discharged on postoperative day 19.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
At the 1-year follow-up, the patient remained 
asymptomatic without transfusion requirements. 
Laboratory tests showed no evidence of hemolysis,
and TTE demonstrated stable prosthetic valve func-
tion with a mean gradient of 5 mm Hg and an effec-
tive orifice area of 2.39 cm 2 , indicating sustained 
valve performance and complete PVL resolution.
DISCUSSION
PVL is a complication after SAVR, occurring in 6% to 
18% of cases. 1 The 2021 European Society of
VISUAL SUMMARY Intentional Oversizing and Overinflation in TAV-in-SAV for Recurrent Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak
Ao = aorta; LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; TAV-in-SAV = transcatheter aortic valve-in-surgical valve; TAVR = transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 
Saigan et al
M A R C H 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 8 6 9 
TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
FIGURE 2 Preprocedural Cardiac Computed Tomography
(A) Long-axis view from preprocedural cardiac CT. The prosthetic valve was implanted in the supra-annular position. The white arrow indicates a distinct gap between 
the surgical valve and the native aortic annulus, corresponding to the site of the paravalvular leak. (B) Key CT measurement parameters used to comprehensively 
evaluate annular geometry and coronary anatomy for procedural planning. (B-1) Sinus of Valsalva: maximum diameter, 45.0 mm; minimum diameter, 30.9 mm. (B-2) 
Annulus: maximum diameter, 31.9 mm; minimum diameter, 27.1 mm; area, 701 mm 2 . (B-3) LVOT: maximum diameter, 31.8 mm; minimum diameter, 27.4 mm. (B-4) 
RCA height: 18.0 mm. (B-5) LCA height: 17.7 mm. (C) Three-dimensional reconstruction from preprocedural CT. The CEP Magna Ease valve is shown in blue, and the 
gap is highlighted in red. The dashed black line represents the original native annulus. The dashed yellow arrow indicates the distance from the lower edge of the 
Magna Ease valve to the native annulus (4.2 mm). Ao = aorta; CT = computed tomography; LV = left ventricle; SOV = sinus of Valsalva; LVOT = left ventricular 
outflow tract; RCA = right coronary artery; LCA = left coronary artery.
FIGURE 1 Evaluation of Paravalvular Leak by Transthoracic Echocardiography
(A) Long-axis view of the left ventricular outflow tract. Color Doppler imaging shows severe paravalvular regurgitant jets. (B) Short-axis view. The white arrow 
indicates the previously implanted 8-mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug 4. Paravalvular regurgitation jets are visible adjacent to the plug. Ao = aorta; LA = left atrium; 
LV = left ventricle; RV = right ventricle.
Saigan et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6
TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak 
M A R C H 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 8 6 9
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Cardiology/European Association for Cardio-Thoracic 
Surgery guidelines recommend reoperation for pa-
tients with symptomatic or hemolytic PVL (Class I, 
Level C) and transcatheter closure for those with high 
or prohibitive surgical risk (Class IIa, Level B). 2 Suc-
cessful transcatheter closure results in clinical 
improvement in approximately 90% of patients. 3
Here, the PVL developed between the surgically 
implanted bioprosthesis in the supra-annular posi-
tion and the native annulus. Annular plication 
required to implant a 25-mm CEP Magna Ease valve
in a large annulus likely increased suture-line 
stress, and bicuspid anatomy with tissue fragility 
after decalcification and reoperation may have 
contributed to PVL recurrence. Although temporary 
stabilization was achieved through redo SAVR and 
percutaneous closure using an AVP, PVL eventually 
recurred. 
Although 
previous 
reports 4,5 
have 
demonstrated the feasibility of TAV-in-SAV for PVL 
closure, the intentional use of an oversized S3UR 
valve and its deliberate overexpansion beyond the 
standard 
size 
recommended 
for 
a 
25-mm
FIGURE 3 Fluoroscopic and Angiographic Views Before and After Valve Deployment
(A) The 25-mm CEP Magna Ease valve was implanted in a supra-annular position relative to the native annulus. Aortic angiography revealed a significant PVL. The 
previously implanted 8-mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug 4 was located between the native annulus and the Magna Ease valve. (B) The 29-mm Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia valve 
was deployed with nominal + 10 mL inflation. (C) Final aortic angiography demonstrated a marked reduction in the PVL. The Sapien 3 valve adequately covered both 
the native aortic annulus (white dashed line) and the previously implanted plug. Ao = aorta; LV = left ventricle; PVL = paravalvular leak.
FIGURE 4 Postprocedural Transthoracic Echocardiography
(A) Parasternal long-axis view after valve-in-valve implantation. (B) Parasternal short-axis view with color Doppler showing no significant paravalvular leak; only 
minimal flow is observed near the valve (white arrow). Ao = aorta; LV = left ventricle.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 
Saigan et al
M A R C H 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 8 6 9 
TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
Magna Ease valve were notable in the current case. 
A recent report demonstrated that a 26-mm Sapien 
valve could be overexpanded within a surgical 
bioprosthesis and a prior 23-mm Sapien with a 
vascular plug, achieving complete sealing. 6 This 
finding supports the feasibility of our oversized, 
overexpanded approach.
This therapeutic strategy was based on several 
anatomical considerations, including the supra-
annular position of the surgical bioprosthesis 
relative to the native annulus, extensive suture 
dehiscence of the surgical valve (Figure 2), a mark-
edly large native annulus, and presence of a previ-
ously implanted AVP. These factors suggest that 
standard valve sizing does not ensure sufficient 
annular contact or complete sealing; therefore, an 
intentionally oversized and overexpanded trans-
catheter valve is necessary to achieve optimal appo-
sition and PVL elimination.
First, regarding the size relationship, the recom-
mended 26-mm S3UR for a 25-mm Magna Ease valve 
would have resulted in 25.9% undersizing relative to 
the native annulus, making sufficient apposition 
unlikely. Conversely, the 29-mm S3UR represented a 
56.2% oversizing relative to the Magna Ease (true
internal diameter: 23 mm, calculated area: π × (23/ 
2) 2 = 416 mm 2 ), while being 7.4% undersized relative 
to the native annulus. Miyasaka et al 7 reported that 
the overexpansion of a 29-mm Sapien 3 can achieve 
adequate expansion and sealing, even in patients 
with a large annulus. Kazuno et al 8 demonstrated 
that the inflow portion of the Sapien 3 tends to flare 
outward, facilitating its apposition to the annulus. 
Based on these findings, in cases with a large 
annulus, implanting an oversized 29-mm S3UR valve 
with intentional overexpansion, creating a flared-
inflow configuration to achieve apposition to the 
native annulus, was considered appropriate.
The longitudinal position of the THV is crucial for 
PVL control. The lower edge of the open-cell portion of 
the 29-mm S3UR was positioned above the sewing ring 
of the Magna Ease. If the open-cell frame extends too 
far toward the left ventricle, blood can pass through, 
resulting in residual PVL. The open-cell height of the 
29-mm valve was 10.9 mm, whereas the distance from 
the upper edge of the Magna Ease to the upper edge 
of the sewing ring was 12.0 mm (Figure 6). Thus, 
aligning the upper edges of both valves placed the 
open-cell portion entirely above the sewing ring, 
facilitating effective control of the residual PVL.
FIGURE 5 Postprocedural Cardiac Computed Tomography
(A) Long-axis view. The 29-mm Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia valve is deployed within the Magna Ease with a mildly flared configuration. Panels A-1 to A-3 correspond to the 
dashed lines in (A) and show cross-sectional short-axis views at the outflow level (A-1), surgical valve level (A-2), and inflow level (A-3). At the inflow level (A-3), the 
valve shows sufficient expansion with an area of 704.4 mm 2 , achieving adequate expansion and sealing even in a patient with a large annulus. (B) Long-axis CT image. 
The sealing cuff of the transcatheter valve effectively covers the region of the prior paravalvular leak, including the previously implanted Amplatzer Vascular Plug 4 
(white arrow). (C) Postprocedural three-dimensional volume-rendered CT reconstruction. The Sapien 3 valve (yellow) appropriately covers the leak area, including 
the Magna Ease valve (light blue) and the Amplatzer plug (pink). It is well apposed to the native annulus. Ao = aorta; CT = computed tomography; LV = left ventricle.
Saigan et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6
TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak 
M A R C H 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 8 6 9
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
The lower edge of the 29-mm device was also required 
to reach the native annulus. Its frame height (22.5 mm) 
exceeded that of the Magna Ease (16.0 mm) by 6.5 mm, 
causing the THV to extend approximately 6.5 mm to-
ward the left ventricle when the upper edges were 
aligned. Computed tomography showed that the dis-
tance from the lower edge of the Magna Ease to the 
native annulus was 4.2 mm (Figure 2B), which could be 
fully covered by the flared inflow of the 29-mm THV. In 
contrast, a 26-mm S3UR with a 20-mm frame height 
would not have reached the annulus, making com-
plete sealing, including the preexisting plug, difficult. 
Thus, the 29-mm device achieved comprehensive 
sealing, effectively encompassing the prior plug site 
and ensuring apposition to the native annulus.
Fluoroscopic and angiographic images obtained 
from a lateral projection (Figure 3, Video 2) further 
delineated the spatial relationships among the sur-
gical valve, native annulus, AVP, and PVL. These 
findings confirmed the feasibility and validity of our 
strategy.
In Japan, high-pressure balloons required for bio-
prosthetic valve fracture are unavailable; therefore, 
the procedure was not performed. However, bio-
prosthetic valve fracture can be considered a 
reasonable treatment option when such devices are 
accessible.
This case suggests that TAV-in-SAV using an 
oversized balloon-expandable valve with intentional 
overexpansion may be a promising treatment option 
for patients with a large annulus, recurrent PVL after 
prior plug closure, or large PVL.
CONCLUSIONS
TAV-in-SAV using an oversized and intentionally 
overexpanded balloon-expandable valve may be an 
effective treatment option for recurrent PVL after 
failed plug closure, particularly in high-risk patients 
with complex anatomy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Editage 
(www.editage.jp) for the English language editing.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Tada has been a clinical proctor for Edwards Lifesciences and has 
received lecture fees from Edwards Lifesciences. All other authors 
have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the con-
tents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Norio Tada,
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Sendai 
Kousei Hospital, 1-20 Tsutsumidori-amamiya, Aoba 
Ward, Sendai, Miyagi 9810914, Japan. E-mail: 
noriotada@hotmail.com.
FIGURE 6 Dimensions of the 25-mm CEP Magna Ease Valve and the 26-mm and 29-mm Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia Valves
For the Magna Ease (left), the stent/frame height (A, 16.0 mm, official data) and the distance from the upper edge of the valve to the upper 
edge of the sewing ring (B, 12.0 mm*) are shown. For the 26-mm (middle) and 29-mm (right) Sapien 3, the stent/frame height (A), open-
cell height (B), and skirt height (C) are shown, all based on official data provided by Edwards Lifesciences. *Measured value.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6 
Saigan et al
M A R C H 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 8 6 9 
TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Ionescu A, Fraser AG, Butchart EG. Prevalence 
and clinical significance of incidental para-
prosthetic valvar regurgitation: a prospective 
study using transesophageal echocardiography. 
Heart. 2003;89:1316–1321.
2. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al, ESC/ 
EACTS Scientific Document Group. 2021 ESC/ 
EACTS Guidelines for the management of valvular 
heart disease: developed by the Task Force for 
the management of Valvular Heart Disease of the 
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the 
European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery 
(EACTS). Eur Heart J. 2022;43:561–632.
3. Ruiz CE, Jelnin V, Kronzon I, et al. Clinical 
outcomes in patients undergoing percutaneous 
closure of periprosthetic paravalvular leaks. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:2210–2217.
4. Demirel C, Okuno T, Lanz J, Windecker S, 
Pilgrim T. Valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement for the treatment of para-
valvular leak due to ring dehiscence. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2021;14:2746–2748.
5. Randall MH, Lewandowski TJ, Choi C, 
Beaver TM. Valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement to treat multijet paravalvular 
regurgitation: a case series and review. Clin Car-
diol. 2021;44:13–19.
6. Chen M, Michel J, Kasel AM. 26 mm SAPIEN 
fractured 23 mm SAPIEN and surgical prosthesis: 
a transcatheter aortic valve-in-valve-in-valve im-
plantation. Eur Heart J. 2025;46(22):2130.
7. Miyasaka M, Yoon SH, Sharma RP, et al. Clin-
ical outcomes of transcatheter aortic valve im-
plantation in patients with extremely large
annulus and SAPIEN 3 dimensions based on post-
procedural computed tomography. Circ J. 
2019;83:799–807.
8. Kazuno Y, Maeno Y, Kawamori H, et al. Com-
parison of SAPIEN 3 and SAPIEN XT transcatheter 
heart valve stent-frame expansion: evaluation 
using multi-slice computed tomography. Eur 
Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2016;17:1054–1062.
KEY WORDS paravalvular leak, surgical 
bioprosthesis, transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement, valve-in-valve procedure
APPENDIX For supplemental videos, 
please see the online version of this paper.
Saigan et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 1 1 , 2 0 2 6
TAV-in-SAV for Hemolytic Paravalvular Leak 
M A R C H 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 8 6 9
8
