
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
Complicated by Aorto–Right
Ventricular Fistula Repaired Via
Valve-in-Valve Replacement
Omar M. Masarweh, MD,a,b Anusha Ghaffar, MD,a,b Stephanie Lopez-Orizondo, MD,a,b Olga Karasik, MD,a,b
Jooby John, MDa
ABSTRACT
A 59-year-old man with a history of severe aortic stenosis with transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) presented
with worsening heart failure. Echocardiography showed a ﬁstula between the aorta and the right ventricle with mild to
moderate paravalvular regurgitation. He underwent a valve-in-valve TAVR with symptomatic improvement and
decreased ﬂow through the ﬁstula. (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2024;29:102165) © 2024 The Authors. Published by
Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 59-year-old man presented with signs and symp-
toms of right- and left-sided heart failure with NYHA
functional class IV symptoms for 1 month, with
worsening generalized swelling, shortness of breath,
and abdominal distention.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
His medical history included severe aortic stenosis
status post transcatheter aortic valve replacement
(TAVR) 3 years earlier, heart failure with recovered
ejection
fraction
(30%-35%
to
60%)
status
post
biventricular
implanted
cardioverter-deﬁbrillator
placement, paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation, type 2 dia-
betes mellitus, and chronic kidney disease stage 3B.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis included worsening of pre-
existing heart failure, worsening aortic stenosis, and
paravalvular regurgitation.
INVESTIGATIONS
On arrival, he was hemodynamically stable, with
NYHA functional class IV heart failure symptoms,
elevated jugular venous pressures, anasarca, and as-
cites.
Laboratory
data
showed
B-type
natriuretic
peptide (BNP) at 2,955 pg/mL (reference range <100
pg/mL).
A
transthoracic
echocardiogram
(TTE)
revealed an aortic valve area of 1.3 cm2, a peak velocity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To be able to make a differential diagnosis of
ﬁstula formation with echocardiography and
cardiac CT.
 To identify patients who may beneﬁt from
ﬁstula repair and identify available repair
techniques.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2023.102165
From the aUniversity of Central Florida/HCA Healthcare GME, Greater Orlando, Florida, USA; and the bDepartment of Internal
Medicine, University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, Florida, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received July 24, 2023; revised manuscript received October 23, 2023, accepted November 24, 2023.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
ª 2 0 2 4 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
of 2 m/s, an ejection fraction of 60%, mild to
moderate aortic insufﬁciency, and a commu-
nication between the aorta and the right
ventricle (Video 1). A transesophageal echo-
cardiogram (TEE) showed a communication
between a sinus adjoining the right coronary
cusp and the right ventricle (Video 2). Cardiac
computed tomography (CT) measured the
aortic annulus at 32  30.4 mm, with a
diameter of 772 mm2, and visualized the ﬁs-
tula (Figure 1). Left- and right-sided heart
catheterization showed oxygen step-up with
a right ventricular (RV) saturation of 71% and
a pulmonary artery saturation of 82%.
MANAGEMENT
A
comprehensive
heart
team
discussion
ensued.
Because the patient was a poor surgical candidate and
had both aortic regurgitation and an aorto-RV ﬁstula,
it was believed that we could potentially accomplish
treatment of both the bioprosthetic regurgitation and
the ﬁstula with placement of a second TAVR valve,
thereby ideally sealing off the ﬁstula and correcting
the aortic regurgitation. The patient then underwent
a valve-in-valve TAVR with placement of a Evolut Pro
Plus 34-mm TAVR valve (Medtronic) over the pre-
existing
Edwards
Sapien
valve
(Edwards
Life-
sciences). By using the previous valve as a landmark,
we were able to land the new valve just below the
prosthesis. Preoperative CT planning showed coro-
nary heights to be 19.4 mm on the left and 22 mm on
the right. Deploying the second valve just below the
pre-existing valve ensured that the coronary ostia
would not be occluded (Figure 2). The valve was
deployed under rapid pacing and post-dilated. After
this, the ﬁstulous connection was found to be still
patent, but ﬂow had dramatically reduced (Videos 3
and 4).
DISCUSSION
As the number of TAVR procedures performed con-
tinues to increase, we are likely to encounter infre-
quent complications. A comprehensive search of the
published literature revealed 14 cases of aorto-RV
ﬁstula formation following TAVR. However, this ap-
pears to be the ﬁrst reported case of a ﬁstula repaired
using a valve-in-valve approach.1
Possible mechanisms of ﬁstula formation following
TAVR may be a contained annular rupture at the time
of valve deployment with drainage into the right
ventricle or trauma from displacement of heavily
calciﬁed tissue near the annulus of the aorta.2 In fact,
annular rupture has almost exclusively been seen
with balloon-expandable valves rather than self-
expanding valves, unless post-dilatation is used for
the
latter.3
Other
considerations
predisposing
to
annular rupture include the size of the aortic valve
annulus (<20 mm) or a narrow aortic root. However,
despite these considerations, there may be undeter-
mined factors that contribute to annular rupture.
Annular rupture and formation of ﬁstulas can
develop in 4 anatomical areas: intra-annular, sub-
annular, supra-annular, or combined. Once a rupture
has occurred, clinical manifestations usually appear
abruptly, evident by the patient’s hemodynamics.
However, presentation can be delayed for a few hours
or more if the injury is small. Some ﬁstulas may
remain silent for years, as in our patient, and can
even remain unrecognized.3 If left untreated, these
ﬁstulas can cause biventricular failure, pulmonary
hypertension, and death.2 RV failure stems from
increased preload from left ventricular to RV shunt-
ing
and increased RV
afterload from
pulmonary
hypertension.
When
deciding
which
patient
should
undergo
repair or conservation management, the ratio of pul-
monary ﬂow to systemic ﬂow (Qp/Qs ratio) has been
hypothesized as a possible indicator of severity.4 In a
review of the previous 14 known cases of aorto-RV
ﬁstula following TAVR, most asymptomatic patients
had a Qp/Qs ratio <1.80, but in the 9-month to 4-year
follow-up period, 3 of the 7 asymptomatic patients
died; the other 4 patients remained asymptomatic.4 It
is evident that it is difﬁcult to assess which patients’
ﬁstulas will progress to the point that intervention is
FIGURE 1
Cardiac Computed Tomography in the Sagittal View
The image shows the ﬁstula connecting the aorta near the right
sinus to the right ventricle (arrow).
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
BNP = B-type natriuretic
peptide
CT = computed tomography
Qp/Qs ratio = ratio of
pulmonary ﬂow to systemic
ﬂow
RV = right ventricular
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiogram
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiogram
Masarweh et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Post-TAVR Aorto-RV Fistula Repair
J A N U A R Y 1 7 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 1 6 5
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
necessary because the timing of clinical presenta-
tion may vary depending on the chronicity and size
of the ﬁstula, as well as hemodynamic changes such
as pulmonary hypertension or RV failure. Deciding
to intervene on a ﬁstula requires proper and dili-
gent planning. Percutaneous coiling, atrial septal
defect or ventricular septal defect occluders, and
surgical repair have all been reported, with various
success rates. When determining which intervention
would be appropriate, assessing coronary heights
should be considered because undergoing a valve-
in-valve
replacement
may
obstruct
the
coronary
ostia.
The decision to intervene in this patient came after
a comprehensive heart team discussion. The team
decided that given the evidence of signiﬁcant right-
sided heart failure, he would beneﬁt from interven-
tion as opposed to medical therapy. There are insuf-
ﬁcient long-term outcome data on intervention vs
conservative
management
in
asymptomatic
and
symptomatic
patients.
The
decision
whether
to
intervene in such complex patients would best be
managed by a multidisciplinary heart team, and these
patients are ideally observed closely and reassessed
frequently
with
echocardiography
and
advanced
cardiac imaging.
There still remain numerous unanswered ques-
tions when it comes to aorto-RV ﬁstulas. How does
medical
management
compare
with
surgical
or
percutaneous repair in terms of overall survival and
symptoms? What is the longevity of these repaired
ﬁstulas? Unfortunately, there are no published data
on the long-term prognosis and development of
further complications in patients with repaired aorto-
RV ﬁstulas.
FOLLOW-UP
Two weeks after the procedure, the patient was seen
in clinic and continued to improve, with NYHA
functional class I to II symptoms. His repeat BNP
value was 358 pg/dL. Our plan is to observe the pa-
tient clinically, and if there is clinical decline, we will
consider
percutaneous
coiling
or
surgical
patch
repair.
CONCLUSIONS
Aorto-RV ﬁstula formation following a TAVR pro-
cedure
is
a
rare
and
potentially
life-threatening
complication that needs to be on the radar of all cli-
nicians. With so few cases reported and no consensus
guidelines available for management, we are all bet-
ter off with more data.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
This research was supported (in whole or in part) by the HCA
Healthcare and/or an HCA Healthcare afﬁliated entity. The views
expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of HCA Healthcare or any
of its afﬁliated entities. The authors have reported that they have no
relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Omar Masar-
weh, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Central Florida College of Medicine, 6850 Lake Nona
Boulevard,
Orlando,
Florida
32827,
USA.
E-mail:
omar.masarweh@ucf.edu.
FIGURE 2
Computed Tomography Showing Right and Left Coronary Heights Relative to Previous Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Replacement
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Masarweh et al
J A N U A R Y 1 7 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 1 6 5
Post-TAVR Aorto-RV Fistula Repair
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Alabbady AM, Sattur S, Bauch TD, Harjai KJ.
Aorto-right ventricular ﬁstula and paravalvular
leak after transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep. 2019;1(5):859–864.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2019.11.025
2. Konda MK, Kalavakunta JK, Pratt JW, Martin D,
Gupta V. Aorto-right ventricular ﬁstula following
percutaneous transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment: case report and literature review. Heart
Views.
2017;18(4):133–136.
https://doi.org/10.
4103/HEARTVIEWS.HEARTVIEWS_115_16
3. Pasic M, Unbehaun A, Buz S, Drews T, Hetzer R.
Annular rupture during transcatheter aortic valve
replacement:
classiﬁcation,
pathophysiology,
diagnostics, treatment approaches, and preven-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2015;8(1 Pt A):1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin.2014.07.020
4. Vrettos A, Duncan A, Ahmed A, Hend EL,
Panoulas V. Successful percutaneous closure of
aortic root-to-right ventricle ﬁstula after trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation: a valuable op-
tion in high-risk surgical patients. Eur Heart J Case
Rep. 2022;6(3):ytac094. https://doi.org/10.1093/
ehjcr/ytac094
KEY WORDS complication, TAVR, valve
implantation
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Masarweh et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Post-TAVR Aorto-RV Fistula Repair
J A N U A R Y 1 7 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 1 6 5
4
