
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR DISEASE
CASE REPORT: CLINICAL CASE
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
for Sutureless Bioprosthetic Valve Tilting
Resulting in Severe Paravalvular Leak
Sandra Zendjebil, MD,a Yohann Bohbot, MD, PHD,a Thomas Hovasse, MD,a Annabelle Nguyen, MD,a
Wassim Khoury, MD,b Michel Habis, MD,b Bernard Chevalier, MD,a Mariama Akodad, MD, PHD,a Philippe Garot, MDa
ABSTRACT
Severe paravalvular leak (PVL) may be complicated by heart failure and haemolysis. PVL management is challenging,
especially when the gap is large. We describe a case of PVL due to tilting of a sutureless biological prosthesis successfully
treated by transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAV-in-SAV). (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2024;29:102270)
© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 57-year-old man (height 190 cm, weight 134 kg) was
admitted for shortness of breath, limb edema, and
8
kg
weight
gain.
His
blood
pressure
was
127/
36 mm Hg, heart rate 53 beats/min, and blood oxygen
saturation 98%, without fever. Clinical examination
revealed bilateral crackles, limb edema extending to
the thighs, jugular vein distention, and an intense
diastolic aortic murmur. Electrocardiography showed
sinus rhythm with no abnormalities.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient underwent surgical aortic valve replace-
ment with an XL Perceval (Sorin) bioprosthetic valve
with
coronary
artery
bypass
graft
(left
internal
mammary artery to circumﬂex artery and right in-
ternal mammary artery to left anterior descending
artery) 4 months earlier for severe aortic stenosis on a
type 1 L-R bicuspid valve. He was subsequently
admitted to the intensive care unit for acute pulmo-
nary
edema,
with
favorable
outcome.
Additional
background included paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation,
severe sleep apnea, and hypertension.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dyspnea associated with weight gain, limb edema,
and
jugular
vein
distention
are
consistent
with
decompensated heart failure, which could have been
triggered by
an episode of atrial ﬁbrillation, an
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To evaluate treatment options for sutureless
prosthesis tilt so that paravalvular leak is
eliminated.
 To obtain PVL location and mechanism from
CT-scan planning in order to select the
appropriate treatment option.
 To counsel your patients with symptomatic
PVL in sutureless bioprosthetic valve tilting
about treatment options, including TAVR to
improve quality of life.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102270
From the aInstitut Cardiovasculaire Paris-Sud, Hôpital Jacques Cartier, Ramsay-Santé, Massy, France; and the bHôpital Privé Parly
2, Ramsay-Santé, Le Chesnay, France.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received September 21, 2023; revised manuscript received January 5, 2024, accepted January 26, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
ª 2 0 2 4 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
ischemic event, or ﬂuid overload. The timing
of this second episode and the diastolic aortic
murmur strongly suggest aortic bioprosthetic
valve dysfunction. In this situation, even
though the patient was apyretic, infectious
endocarditis had to be ruled out. There was
no evidence of pulmonary infection or exac-
erbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
INVESTIGATIONS
Laboratory tests revealed mild kidney failure, normal
liver enzymes, and no hemolytic anemia. N-terminal
pro–B-type natriuretic peptide was increased (3,330
pg/mL), and there was no inﬂammatory syndrome,
with a white blood count of 5  109/L and C-reactive
protein level of 6 mg/L.
Transthoracic
echocardiography
showed
a
normal-size
left
ventricle
with
a left
ventricular
ejection
fraction
(LVEF)
of
60%,
and
a
severe
anterior aortic paravalvular leak (PVL) with elevated
systolic
pulmonary
artery
pressure
(65
mm
Hg)
(Figure 1, Video 1).
Cardiac computed tomography revealed signiﬁcant
malposition and tilting of the bioprosthesis, resulting
in a crescent-shaped anterior gap extending over
5.8 mm in length and 197.9 mm2 in area. The native
asymmetric aortic annulus dimensions were 37.1 
32.1 mm (mean diameter of 34.6 mm), with an area of
941 mm2 and a perimeter of 109.4 mm, and the mean
internal diameter of the prosthesis was 25.2 mm, with
an area of 498 mm2 and a perimeter of 79.8 mm. The
implantation depth of the prosthesis was 9.2 mm and
the tilting angle was 46 from the posterior wall of the
aorta (Figure 1).
MANAGEMENT
This patient suffered from heart failure due to severe
PVL secondary to sutureless aortic prosthesis tilt.
Surgical revision was high risk mostly owing to
morbid obesity and severe sleep apnea and was
refused by the patient. Society of Thoracic Surgeons
score was 1.5% and Euroscore 2 was 7.5%. The heart
team decided in favor of valve-in-valve transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR). The procedure was
performed under local anesthesia and right femoral
access. The aortic prosthesis was crossed with a
straight-tip guidewire inside a Judkins right catheter
and a stiff guidewire was inserted into the left
ventricle. The intravalvular location of the stiff wire
was checked with the use of ﬂuoroscopy and X-ray
tube rotation.
A 29-mm Sapien 3 prosthesis (þ3 mL; Edwards
Lifesciences) was implanted under rapid left ven-
tricular
pacing
(Video
2).
On-table
transthoracic
echocardiography revealed a reduced but persistent
anterior PVL. Therefore, postdilation was performed
using the same balloon and adding 2 mL (total overﬁll
of 5
mL) (Video 3). Final on-table
transthoracic
echocardiography revealed signiﬁcant PVL regression
to a mild degree and a mean transprosthetic gradient
of 4 mm Hg. Diastolic pressure increased to 80 mm Hg
at the end of the procedure. Diuretics dosage were
reduced before discharge.
DISCUSSION
PVL after TAVR or sutureless valve implantation may
be related to malposition due to anatomic factors,
sizing issues, or procedural ﬂaws. Although the de-
vice can anchor to the native annulus and leaﬂets,
undersized TAVR or sutureless prostheses can lead to
PVL because they may not appose properly to the
aortic wall, especially in the presence of nodular
calcium. In this case, an undersized sutureless pros-
thesis
was
implanted
on
a
bicuspid
valve
with
asymmetric Valsalva sinuses and wide annulus. The
XL Perceval prosthesis is indicated for valve annuli
up to 27 mm in mean diameter. In a similar case, the
patient underwent a new valvular replacement with
sutured prosthesis.1 In a cohort of 25 patients with
type 1 bicuspid valves who underwent surgical aortic
valve replacement (SAVR) with a sutureless valve,
only 1 mild PVL was reported at 12 months. This result
shows that the outcomes of this procedure may
depend on the shape and width of the sinuses and the
surgical techniques used to make them more sym-
metric and regular.2
Over the past decade, valve sizing substantially
improved
thanks
to
preprocedural
CT
in
TAVR,
enabling selection of the appropriate valve size, and
sizing issues are now rare. Unlike for TAVR, preop-
erative screening for SAVR does not systematically
include CT-based annulus measurements, but rather
use of speciﬁc sizers, which may lead to sizing issues.
Valve explantation and redo SAVR may be the
preferred option in patients with recent aortic valve
dysfunction. However, this may be associated with
increased morbidity and was strongly rejected by the
patient
and
heart
team
due
to
morbid
obesity.
Transcatheter plug implantation appears to be a
satisfactory alternative. However, in the present case,
the large crescent-shaped gap would have made
proper closure uncertain with a high risk of plug
migration and accentuated tilt of the surgical valve.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
PVL = paravalvular leak
SAVR = surgical aortic valve
replacement
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Zendjebil et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
TAVR for Severe Paravalvular Leak Due to Prosthesis Tilt
A P R I L 3 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 7 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Although outcomes of late dilation have proved
favorable for transcatheter valves without structural
dysfunction, no data are available for sutureless sur-
gical valves and in cases of valve undersizing or tilt-
ing mechanism as in our case.3 Valve-in-valve TAVR
is not a recommended option for PVL treatment of a
sutured bioprosthetic valve, because it may not allow
properly expanding the valve sewing ring. In the
present case, the speciﬁc design of the Perceval
sutureless valve with a nitinol frame may allow the
valve dimensions to be stretched with the use of a
balloon-expandable transcatheter valve and it was
therefore the preferred option. Transcatheter valve
sizing was based on native annulus dimensions.
Because the native annulus was large, beyond the
available
transcatheter
heart
valve
sizes,
it
was
decided to overﬁll the transcatheter heart valve
balloon with a total of 5 mL to reduce PVL without
creating intravalvular leak. More than mild aortic PVL
is known to have a dramatic prognostic impact on
mortality after SAVR and TAVR.4,5 Therefore, valve-
in-valve TAVR emerged as a bail-out strategy in this
case
and
remained
challenging
because
of
the
annulus size, resulting in overﬁlling of a 29-mm Sa-
pien beyond limits, barely resulting in a 29 mm
diameter on CT. Although valve-in-valve TAVRs for
valve degeneration were mostly redo TAVRs,6 they
have been described with both Sapien 3 and Evolut in
Perceval
prostheses7
and
were
successfully
per-
formed in 32 cases of degenerated Perceval bio-
prosthesis in a recent study.8
FOLLOW-UP
Two months after surgery, the patient had no heart
failure
symptoms.
Echocardiography
revealed
FIGURE 1
Paravalvular Leak Reduction After TAVR in Tilted Bioprosthesis
(A to C) Pre-TAVR CT scan displaying the tilted Perceval prosthesis, resulting in an anterior crescent-shaped PVL (arrows). Internal diameter of the prosthesis: 25.2 mm;
area: 498 mm2; native annulus diameter estimated at 34.6 mm. (D) Transthoracic echocardiography showing resulting massive anterior aortic PVL (arrow). (E to G)
Post-TAVR CT scan showing almost complete PVL occlusion (arrows) with a Sapien 3 29 mm valve inside the Perceval prosthesis (ﬁnal internal diameter: 30.3 mm; area:
695 mm2). (H) Important PVL reduction (arrow). CT ¼ computed tomography; PVL ¼ paravalvular leak; TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Zendjebil et al
A P R I L 3 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 7 0
TAVR for Severe Paravalvular Leak Due to Prosthesis Tilt
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
persistent mild anterior PVL. Follow-up CT revealed a
dramatic reduction in the gap between the prosthesis
and the aortic wall (Figure 1).
CONCLUSIONS
TAVR appears to be feasible in symptomatic PVL after
surgical sutureless bioprosthetic valve implantation,
as an alternative treatment when other treatments
are not adequate, especially in the case of circum-
ferential PVL due to prosthesis tilt. However, this
technique requires further data to be validated in
complex PVL cases.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Philippe Garot,
Institut Cardiovasculaire Paris-Sud (ICPS), Hôpital
Jacques Cartier, 6 avenue du Noyer Lambert, 91300
Massy, France. E-mail: p.garot@angio-icps.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Chiariello GA, Villa E, Messina A, Troise G.
Dislocation of a sutureless prosthesis after type I
bicuspid aortic valve replacement. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2018;156(2):e87–e89.
2. Nguyen A, Fortin W, Mazine A, et al. Sutureless
aortic valve replacement in patients who have
bicuspid aortic valve. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2015;150(4):851–857.
3. Nagaoka E, Sato K, Hage A, et al. Rescue
balloon aortic valvuloplasty after sutureless aortic
valve replacement for severe paravalvular leak.
Innovations (Phila). 2019;14(5):476–479.
4. Shah S, Alashi A, Pettersson GB, et al. Charac-
teristics and longer-term outcomes of paravalvular
leak after aortic and mitral valve surgery. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157(5):1785–1792.e1.
5. Laakso T, Laine M, Moriyama N, et al. Impact of
paravalvular
regurgitation
on
the
mid-term
outcome after transcatheter and surgical aortic
valve
replacement.
Eur
J
Cardiothorac
Surg.
2020;58(6):1145–1152.
6. Landes U, Hochstadt A, Manevich L, et al.
Treatment of late paravalvular regurgitation after
transcatheter aortic valve implantation: prog-
nostic implications. Eur Heart J. 2023;44(15):1331–
1339.
7. Suleiman T, Tanseco K, Arunothayaraj S, et al.
Valve-in-valve
transcatheter
aortic
valve
implantation for the failing surgical perceval bio-
prosthesis. Cardiovasc Revasc. 2022;40S:148–153.
8. Concistrè G, Gasbarri T, Ravani M, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement in degenerated
Perceval bioprosthesis: clinical and technical as-
pects in 32 cases. J Clin Med. 2023;12(19):6265.
KEY WORDS cardiac CT-scan, paravalvular
leak, sutureless, transcatheter aortic
replacement valve
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Zendjebil et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
TAVR for Severe Paravalvular Leak Due to Prosthesis Tilt
A P R I L 3 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 2 7 0
4
