
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE
Pure Aortic Regurgitation Complicated
by Membranous Interventricular Septum
Aneurysm Treated With Transcatheter
Aortic Valve Replacement
Jorge Jean Kassis, MD,a Fernanda M. Mangione, MD,a Salvador A.B. Cristóvão, MD,a
Maria Fernanda Zuliani Mauro, MD, PHD,a Cíntia Acosta Melo, MD,a Gustavo Alexandre Dutra, MD,c
Leandro Menezes Alves da Costa, MD, PHD,a,b Fernando Alves da Costa, MD, PHD,a,b
José Armando Mangione, MD, PHDa
ABSTRACT
An 89-year-old woman with severe aortic regurgitation and an aneurysmal interventricular membranous
septum extending into the aortic annulus underwent successful transcatheter aortic valve replacement. A
challenging case because of the risk of valve mispositioning complications attributed to the co-occurrence of
pure aortic regurgitation (very low calcium burden) with an aneurysmal interventricular membranous septum.
(Level of Difﬁculty: Intermediate.) (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2023;10:101762) © 2023 The Authors. Published
by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 89-year-old woman presented with progressive
dyspnea (New York Heart Association functional class
III). The patient had previously undergone implan-
tation of cardiac resynchronization therapy because
of
worsening
ventricular
dysfunction
and
septal
dyssynchrony 3 months before presentation. She
experienced worsening of shortness of breath and a
decline from New York Heart Association functional
class II to III. Her previous diagnosis of moderate
aortic regurgitation had evolved to severe, and she
was evaluated for transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment (TAVR) because of severe frailty.
On presentation, the patient was afebrile and
acyanotic; her body mass index was 15.8 kg/m2 with
blood pressure of 166/45 mm Hg, heart rate of 60
beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 94% on room air.
The physical examination showed mildly elevated
neck
veins,
clear
lungs,
an
early
diastolic
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To recognize that patients with IVMS aneu-
rysms are subject to complications leading to
common valvular diseases and arrhythmias.
 To understand the importance of a multi-
disciplinary heart team approach and
imaging studies in the management of
complex structural heart patients.
 To
illustrate
the
expanding
role
of
transcatheter aortic valve replacement in
high-risk patients with challenging anatomy.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2023.101762
From the aBeneﬁcência Portuguesa de São Paulo Hospital, São Paulo, Brazil; bClínica Paulista de Doença Cardiovascular, São
Paulo, Brazil; and the cMcMaster University, Ontario, Canada.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received July 14, 2022; revised manuscript received December 12, 2022, accepted January 11, 2023.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 1 0 , 2 0 2 3
ª 2 0 2 3 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
regurgitation murmur (grade 3/6) best heard
over the aortic area, and minimal lower ex-
tremity edema.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
Her medical history included chronic renal
disease (creatinine clearance ¼ 30 mL/min),
hypertension,
hypothyroidism,
treated
breast cancer, and previous pacemaker implantation
because of extreme bradycardia with a recent up-
grade to a resynchronizer.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for shortness of breath in a
patient with recent cardiac resynchronization therapy
implantation includes device malfunction and incor-
rect device settings. Lung infections can also present
with shortness of breath.
INVESTIGATIONS
Blood work showed a normal white blood count and
mild anemia, and her B-type natriuretic peptide was
elevated (1,120 ng/L). Her creatinine was 2 mg/dL
with normal electrolytes. Chest radiographs showed
no lung inﬁltrates. Electrocardiography showed the
pacemaker rhythm. An echocardiography demon-
strated moderately impaired left ventricular systolic
function with an ejection fraction of 31%, a left ven-
tricular end-diastolic volume of 132 mL (indexed at
100 mL/m2), a ﬁbrocalciﬁc aortic valve with a pre-
served opening, severe aortic regurgitation, and a
ventricular septal aneurysm protruding from the left
ventricle into the right ventricle but not communi-
cating with it (Video 1, Figure 1). Preprocedural car-
diac multidetector computed tomography (MDCT)
(Video 2, Figure 2) was performed showing the septal
aneurysm, measuring about 2.56  1.84  1.33 cm,
maintaining a wide base communicating with the
aortic annulus, indicating a probable interventricular
communication shrouded by tricuspid tissue and
apparently without a residual defect. The MDCT also
showed an aortic annulus of 22  26 mm with an area
of 430 mm2 and a perimeter of 72.8 mm2 (excluding
the aneurysm).
MANAGEMENT (MEDICAL INTERVENTIONS)
After review of the imaging and clinical history, the
heart team consensus was to proceed with aortic
valve implantation using the 29-mm Evolut R self-
expanding valve (Medtronic) even though TAVR is
considered an “off-label” treatment modality for pure
aortic regurgitation.
The procedure was performed through the trans-
femoral route under transthoracic echocardiographic
guidance. The transcatheter aortic heart valve was
deployed under moderate pacing at 140 beats/min
(Video 3). The maximum depth of the valve implant
was approximately 10 mm. After implantation, im-
aging demonstrated no paravalvular leak. Hemody-
namic
stability
was
maintained
throughout
the
procedure,
and
pressure
curves
demonstrated
a
decrease in end-diastolic ventricular pressure and an
increase in diastolic aortic pressure. Ventriculog-
raphy in the left cranial projection did not show any
ventricular septal defect (Video 4). The patient was
discharged after 3 days of monitoring.
DISCUSSION
Patients with a noncalciﬁed aortic valve who have
pure aortic regurgitation (without aortic stenosis) are
difﬁcult to treat with TAVR because of the lack of
calciﬁcation of the aortic leaﬂet, which can lead to
valve malposition, embolization, and residual aortic
regurgitation. The outcomes for patients undergoing
TAVR
for
severe
aortic
regurgitation
are
worse
compared with those with on-label indications, with
lower device success and higher procedural compli-
cations.1 In addition, they may present increased
anatomical
complexity,2
such
as
a
large
aortic
annulus, aortic dilatation, and, as in this case, mem-
branous interventricular septal aneurysm, making
the procedure even more challenging.
FIGURE 1
Apical 4-Chamber Echocardiogram View of the
Membranous Ventricular Septal Aneurysm
A ventricular septal aneurysm (*) is shown protruding from the
left ventricle (LV) into the right ventricle (RV) but not
communicating with it. LA ¼ left atrium; RA ¼ right atrium.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
IVMS = interventricular
membranous septum
MDCT = multidetector
computed tomography
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Kassis et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 0 , 2 0 2 3
TAVR in a Patient With Pure Aortic Regurgitation and Septum Aneurysm
M A R C H 1 5 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 7 6 2
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
The membranous septum that covers the midseptal
portion of the interventricular septum is absent of the
myocardium and is made by dense ﬁbrous tissue.3
Despite the fact that the interventricular membra-
nous septum (IVMS) is susceptible to regular high-
pressure gradients, bulging and forming aneurysms
are still uncommon occurrences, and extension into
the aortic annulus is even rarer.4 It is estimated that
IVMS aneurysms occur in 0.3% of patients with
congenital heart disease.5
The development of arrhythmias is not uncommon
to IVMS patients.6,7 The ﬁbers of the atrioventricular
bundle travel along the posterior and inferior margins
of the IVMS, and with progression of the IVMS
aneurysm,
these
ﬁbers
can
be
stretched,
thus
injuring the conducting system.8 The most common
arrhythmias in patients with IVMS aneurysm are
atrioventricular block, ventricular tachycardia, and
bundle branch block. Another complication is aortic
insufﬁciency because of the continuation of the IVMS
FIGURE 2
Cardiac Multidetector Computed Tomography of the Membranous Ventricular Septal Aneurysm
(Left) Cardiac computed tomography of the membranous ventricular septal aneurysm in the long view (arrow). (Right) The membranous
ventricular septal aneurysm communicating with the aortic annulus in the short view (arrow).
FIGURE 3
2-Year Follow-Up Cardiac Multidetector Computed Tomography
Computed tomography imaging showing valve leaﬂets with minimal hypoattenuated leaﬂet thickening after 2 years of transcatheter aortic
valve replacement in (left) the short view and (right) the long view.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 0 , 2 0 2 3
Kassis et al
M A R C H 1 5 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 7 6 2
TAVR in a Patient With Pure Aortic Regurgitation and Septum Aneurysm
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
aneurysm into the aortic cusps. The appendix tissue
of the IVMS aneurysm may pull the aortic leaﬂets into
itself, thus distorting the supporting structure of the
aortic valve and leading to aortic insufﬁciency.9
The diagnosis of IVMS aneurysm is usually an
incidental ﬁnding most commonly noted during im-
aging studies that are performed in preparation for a
surgical intervention.10 MDCT is considered ideal for
preprocedure TAVR to assess the size and location of
the IVMS aneurysm in addition to other anatomical
features that will help deﬁne the type and size of the
valve used.
The team’s decision to use this particular self-
expanding valve was inﬂuenced by the following
factors:
1)
its
ability
during
implantation
to
be
recaptured and repositioned because the anchoring
zone was carefully chosen to be below the end of the
aneurysm
in
the
left
ventricular
outﬂow
tract;
2) because of its tall frame, supra-annular valve
functioning, and skirt height, it was possible to
perform a lower implant in an attempt to seal the
IVMS aneurysm with the device and also to reduce
the chance of valve embolization; and 3) its anchoring
occurring not only in the aortic annulus and com-
missures but also in the aorta. The 29-mm size was
chosen because the measured annulus perimeter was
72.8 mm2, which is on the lower side of the valve
range (between 72.3 and 81.7 mm) and would repre-
sent reasonable oversizing. Excellent results were
obtained with no residual aortic regurgitation, no
worsening of mitral regurgitation, a low transvalvular
gradient, and adequate aneurysm sealing.
Dedicated devices such as the JenaValve (Jena-
Valve Technology GmbH) and the newer-generation
FIGURE 4
Cardiac Multidetector Computed Tomography of the Membranous Ventricular Septal Aneurysm
Computed tomography images showing (A and C) the presence of the membranous ventricular septal aneurysm before transcatheter aortic
valve replacement and (B and D) its absence after 2 years of the transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
Kassis et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 0 , 2 0 2 3
TAVR in a Patient With Pure Aortic Regurgitation and Septum Aneurysm
M A R C H 1 5 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 7 6 2
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Evolut Pro (Medtronic) also could have been good
options because of the external sealing skirt, but they
were not available in the Brazilian market at the time
of the procedure.
FOLLOW-UP
The patient was seen at 3 months and at 2 years for
follow-ups and was free of congestive heart failure
symptoms without a diastolic regurgitation murmur
on
examination.
The
2-year
follow-up
included
echocardiography, which indicated a transvalvular
gradient of 10.9 mm Hg and no aortic regurgitation,
and MDCT (Figure 3) showing discrete signs of hypo-
attenuated
leaﬂet
thickening,
indicating
a
low
thrombotic burden in the valve prosthesis and com-
plete healing of the membranous interventricular
septum aneurysm that originally extended into the
aortic annulus (Figure 4).
CONCLUSIONS
This case emphasizes the possibility of TAVR in
treating patients with pure aortic valve insufﬁciency
associated with an IVMS aneurysm extending into
the aortic annulus. TAVR provides a feasible alter-
native treatment for patients who are considered
high-risk for open heart surgery and those patients
who present with a challenging anatomy. How much
the IVMS aneurysm caused the aortic insufﬁciency
still remains unclear. This case also demonstrates
the need of a heart team and imaging studies,
particularly
cardiac
MDCT,
in
the
planning
and
strategic
deployment
of
the
transcatheter
heart
valve.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Cristóvão is a proctor for Edwards Lifesciences and for Abbott. Dr
Mangione is on the advisory board of Microport; has received
educational honoraria from Medtronic and Edwards Lifesciences; and
is a proctor for Edwards Lifesciences. All other authors have reported
that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper
to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Fernanda
Mangione, Beneﬁcência Portuguesa de São Paulo
Hospital, Rua Maestro Cardim, 637 Bela Vista, São
Paulo,
São
Paulo
01323-001,
Brazil.
E-mail:
fermangione@hotmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Yoon SH, Schmidt T, Bleiziffer S, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement in pure native
aortic valve regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2017;70:2752–2763.
2. Wu MH, Chang CI, Wang JK, Lue HC. Charac-
terization of aneurysmal transformation in peri-
membranous
ventricular
septal
defects:
an
adhered anterior leaﬂet of tricuspid valve pre-
disposes to the development of left ventricular to
right atrial shunt. Int J Cardiol. 1994;47(2):117–125.
3. Wu MH, Wu JM, Chang CI, et al. Implication of
aneurysmal transformation in isolated perimem-
branous ventricular septal defect. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 1993;72(7):596–601.
4. Mall FP. Aneurysm of the membranous septum
projecting into the right atrium. Anat Rec. 1912;6:
291–299.
5. Perasalo O, Halonen PI, Pyorala Telivuo L.
Aneurysm of the membranous ventricular septum
causing
obstruction
of
the
right
ventricular
outﬂow tract in a case of ventricular septal defect.
Acta Chir Scand Suppl. 1961;suppl 283:123–128.
6. Heggtveit HA. Congenital aneurysm of the
membranous
septum
associated
with
bundle
branch block. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1964;14:112–117.
7. Hoeffel JC, Henry M, Flizot M, et al. Radiologic
patterns
of
aneurysms
of
the
membranous
septum. Am Heart J. 1976;91:450.
8. Smeeton WM, Anderson KR, Ho SY, Davies MJ,
Anderson RH. Conduction tissue changes associ-
ated with enlarged membranous septum-a cause
of sudden death? Br Heart J. 1981;46:636–642.
9. Teoﬁlovski-Parapid G, Baptista CA, DiDio LJ,
Vaughan C. The membranous portion of the
interventricular septum and its relationship with
the aortic valve in humans. Surg Radiol Anat.
1991;13:23–28.
10. Choi M, Jung JI, Lee BY, Kim HR. Ventricular
septal aneurysms in adults: ﬁndings of cardiac CT
images and correlation with clinical features. Acta
Radiol. 2011;52:619–623.
KEY WORDS aortic regurgitation,
interventricular membranous septum
aneurysm, transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 0 , 2 0 2 3
Kassis et al
M A R C H 1 5 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 7 6 2
TAVR in a Patient With Pure Aortic Regurgitation and Septum Aneurysm
5
