
=== PAGE 1 ===
RHYTHM DISORDERS AND ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY
CLINICAL CASE
Peri-Mitral Atrial Tachycardia Following
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
Kenta Tsutsui, MD, PHD, Akinori Kondo, MD, Tatsuya Ohta, MD, PHD, Mina Hatsuno, MD, PHD,
Masataka Arakawa, MD, Mizuki Miura, MD, PHD, Akihisa Kataoka, MD, PHD, Naoyuki Yokoyama, MD, PHD,
Yusuke Watanabe, MD, PHD, Ken Kozuma, MD, PHD
ABSTRACT
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is commonly used to treat severe aortic stenosis. Although atrial
ﬁbrillation and conduction disturbances are well-known complications, peri-mitral atrial tachycardia (PMT) post-TAVR is
less frequently reported. A 75-year-old man with persistent PMT 1-year post-TAVR was managed successfully through
radiofrequency catheter ablation. High-density 3-dimensional mapping identiﬁed a macro-reentrant circuit and a
slow-conduction area adjacent to the transcatheter aortic valve implantation site, diagnosed as counterclockwise PMT.
Ablation resulted in tachycardia termination, with no recurrence at follow-up. This case highlights structural alterations
from TAVR as potential contributors to arrhythmic substrates. The rarity and successful management of PMT post-TAVR
contribute signiﬁcant insights, emphasizing the need for vigilant arrhythmic monitoring and tailored interventions.
This case underscores the importance of recognizing and managing rare arrhythmic complications following TAVR,
enhancing patient outcomes through precise diagnostic and interventional strategies. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:102967)
© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 75-year-old man was referred to our hospital for
radiofrequency
catheter
ablation
of
a
persistent,
symptomatic and drug-resistant atrial tachycardia
(AT) (Figure 1). He had a history of ischemic stroke
and end-stage renal disease due to renal sclerosis. He
had been hemodialysis-dependent for 7 years. One
year ago, he underwent transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
(TAVR)
due
to
severe,
symptomatic
aortic
stenosis (AS). Due to notable
calciﬁcation
extending from the valve cusp to the subvalvular re-
gion in the non-coronary cusp, a self-expanding valve
(Evolut FX 26-mm, Medtronic) was used. The TAVR
was
successfully
performed
via
a
transfemoral
approach. The post-implant period was uneventful
other than transient left bundle branch block that
eventually turned left anterior fascicular block. At
this point, neither atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) nor AT was
documented. Six months later, he developed short
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 This
case
advocates
routine
arrhythmic
monitoring with a speciﬁc lookout for less
common tachycardias, which, although rare,
can signiﬁcantly impact patient outcomes.
 Further studies are needed to quantify the
risk and characterize the speciﬁc types of
tachycardias that can arise following TAVR.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102967
From the Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received August 26, 2024; revised manuscript received September 27, 2024, accepted October 31, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
episodes of paroxysmal AF during dialysis
and eventually developed sustained atrial
tachycardia (Figure 1).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Electrocardiogram (Figure 1) shows atypical
atrial ﬂutter, suggesting varied possibility
such
as
localized
reentrant
AT,
roof-
dependent AT, and peri-mitral atrial tachy-
cardia (PMT).
INVESTIGATION
Electrophysiology study and ablation were performed
under deep sedation using propofol and dexmedeto-
midine. The AT was sustained at the beginning of the
ablation session. The initial tachycardia cycle length
(TCL) was stable at 236 ms. Post pacing intervals at
the inferior aspect of the right atrium and at posterior
wall of the left atrium (LA) were 428 ms and 395 ms,
respectively, suggesting that AT originated in LA. A 3-
dimensional map created by a high-density mapping
system (CARTO, Biosense Webster) demonstrated
that the total activation time in the LA was 236 ms,
conﬁrming that the macro-reentrant AT was within
the LA (Figure 2). Further pacing study revealed that
post pacing intervals–TCL at the anterior, lateral, and
septal aspects of the mitral annulus, including the
coronary sinus (CS) were 18 ms, 20 ms, and 12 ms,
respectively, nearing TCL, whereas that at the LA
posterior wall was 62 ms, indicating that the macro-
reentry
revolves
around
the
mitral
annulus
(Figures 2 and 3A). A wide low-voltage area was pre-
sent in the anterior wall of the LA body (Figure 3B) in
which the conduction velocity of the AT was slowed
(depicted as the zig-zag orange arrow in Figure 3A),
and was adjacent to the previously implanted TAVR
valve (Figures 3A and 3C). Based on these ﬁndings,
the AT
was diagnosed as counterclockwise PMT
(Figures 2 and 3A).
FIGURE 1
The 12-Lead Electrocardiogram of Atrial Tachycardia
P waves are evident in lead II (emphasized by arrows in the inset).
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AF = atrial ﬁbrillation
AS = aortic stenosis
AT = atrial tachycardia
CS = coronary sinus
LA = left atrium
PMT = peri-mitral atrial
tachycardia
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TCL = tachycardia cycle length
Tsutsui et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Peri-Mitral Atrial Tachycardia Following TAVR
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 6 7
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
MANAGEMENT
History of concomitant AF and existence of the
low-voltage area found in the LA posterior wall led us
to perform pulmonary vein isolation and left poste-
rior isolation followed by the lateral mitral isthmus
line. Conduction block was achieved in all lines
associated with pulmonary vein isolation and left
posterior isolation at the ﬁrst attempt. The initial
endocardial ablation in the mitral isthmus slowed the
TCL by 22 ms with the atrial sequence kept un-
changed. The epicardial gap was identiﬁed within the
CS at the epicardial side of the endocardial mitral line.
Ablation at the point from the CS terminated AT
immediately after the energy delivery (Figure 3D).
Bidirectional conduction block was conﬁrmed.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
After the ablation, atrial pacing did not induce any
tachycardia and the procedure was ended. The pa-
tient’s symptoms resolved, and no recurrence of
arrhythmia was observed up to 3 months.
DISCUSSION
The present case highlights a rare instance of PMT
emerging after TAVR, a phenomenon not extensively
documented in the literature. The development of
PMT in this context suggests a possible mechanistic
link between the structural alterations by TAVR and
the arrhythmic substrate.
As TAVR is more widely accepted as treatment for
AS,
its
associated
complications,
particularly
arrhythmic events, have received more attention.1,2
Although the most common arrhythmias post-TAVR
are AF and conduction disturbances such as atrio-
ventricular block, other AT, although less frequent,
present
signiﬁcant
management
challenges
and
impact patient outcomes.
Recent data demonstrate that up to 31% of patients
develop
new
arrhythmias
within
a
year
post–
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), with
non-AF tachycardias accounting for a notable pro-
portion of these cases.2 However, detailed reports
focusing on these less common arrhythmias, such as
PMT, are surprisingly scarce in the current literature.
The lack of detailed focus underscores the need for
more case-based evidence to better understand the
mechanisms, treatment responses, and prognostic
implications of such arrhythmias.
In the present case, alongside other contributing
factors such as age and a history of AS and AF, the
TAVR procedure itself may have played a role in the
development of PMT. Unlike surgical aortic valve
replacement, TAVR does not involve direct surgical
manipulation (eg, incision, gripping by forceps) to the
cardiac
anatomy.
However,
TAVR
does
involve
considerable mechanical stretching to surrounding
FIGURE 2
Re-Entrant Circuit of the Tachycardia
The tachycardia cycle length was fully covered within the left atrium (LA). Entrainment study demonstrated post pacing interval–tachycardia
cycle lengths were within 20 ms around the mitral annulus (values are shown in the white boxes) while that was off at the posterior wall of
the LA, demonstrating that the tachycardia was peri-mitral atrial tachycardia. AP ¼ anterior to posterior; PA ¼ posterior to anterior.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Tsutsui et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 6 7
Peri-Mitral Atrial Tachycardia Following TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
components of heart (visualized by periprocedural
electroanatomical map, computed tomography, and
echocardiography in Figures 3A to 3C, 3E, and 3F,
respectively), which can alter the electrophysiological
properties of the atria. We previously reported un-
expected cardiac tamponade due to trauma by peri-
aortic calciﬁed spot pushed by a balloon-expanded
TAVR valve.3 If not that traumatic, in this case, the
expansion of the ascending aorta possibly contrib-
uted to the formation of a slow-conduction zone in
the anterior wall of the LA, facilitating the develop-
ment of the reentrant circuit. This ﬁnding aligns with
previous reports indicating that: 1) atrial damage
induced by preceding intervention such as cardiac
surgery,4-6 AF ablation,4,5 and chemotherapy7 facili-
tate substrate that drives atypical atrial tachycardia;
and 2) “idiopathic” PMT (those lacking prior cardiac
surgery or ablation) is associated with extensive and
anteroseptal distribution of the atrial scar area.8
Although it is plausible that the tachycardia was
triggered by the TAVR procedure, establishing a
direct causal relationship is challenging as de novo
ATs originating from scar tissue in the anterior atrial
wall are documented in context with atrial myop-
athy.9 However, 2 factors warrant consideration:
1) the temporal association between TAVR and the
subsequent development of de novo PMT; and 2) the
previously
recognized
relationship
between
me-
chanical compression of the anterior LA wall by the
ascending aorta, even in the absence of TAVR, sug-
gest a possible mechanistic link.9
Although
modern
high-density
3-dimensional
mapping systems help deliver more effective diag-
nosis and treatment for such tachycardias,10,11 care
FIGURE 3
The Relationship Between Arrhythmogenic Substrate of PMT and TAVR Valve
(A) The atrial tachycardia (AT) was diagnosed as counterclockwise peri-mitral AT (annotated with colored arrows; orange, slowly conducting atrial wall, yellow, the rest
of the circuit). For details regarding the diagnostic process, see the main text. Slowly conducting, fragmented local electrogram is shown in the inset. SC ¼ slow
conduction; LAO-CAU ¼ left anterior oblique–caudal; TCL ¼ tachycardia cycle length. (B) Low-voltage area (in red, yellow, green, and other non-purple colors) indicated
by white arrows. The SC zone shown in (A) is indicated with an orange dot. (C) Spatial relationship between the low-voltage area and ascending aorta. The SC zone
shown in (A) is indicated with an orange dot. AP ¼ anterior to posterior. (D) AT termination during ablation from the epicardial side of the mitral isthmus.
Subsequently, the line of conduction block was conﬁrmed by differential pacing and a 3-dimensional map (not shown) and no AT or atrial ﬁbrillation was induced.
(E) Computed tomography images at the level of the anterior left atrial (LA) wall before (left) and after (right) transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), indicating
that aortic tissue including the displaced calciﬁed lesion push the anterior aspect of the LA (arrow). (F) The short-axis view of transthoracic echocardiography
demonstrates that the ascending aorta (Ao) with the implanted valve appears pushing the anterior left atrial wall (arrow).
Tsutsui et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Peri-Mitral Atrial Tachycardia Following TAVR
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 6 7
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
should be taken as long-term follow-up and repeat
ablation or additional antiarrhythmic drug may be
required
in
these
patients,
as
recurrence
is
common.12,13
There are 2 options that can treat peri-mitral AT:
either anterior or lateral line in addition to pulmonary
vein isolation. We opted for the lateral line approach
because: 1) it occasionally causes iatrogenic biatrial
tachycardia;14 and 2) previous studies suggest that
recurrent ﬂutter is less common with the lateral
approach
compared
with
the
anterior
approach,
whereas both strategies have similar acute success
rates for peri-mitral AT.15 However, the decision be-
comes more complex when extensive scarring is
present in the anterior region, as in the current case.
The main drawback of the lateral approach is that it
may leave the patient at future risk of developing
anterior
scar-related
AT,
most
likely
a
localized
reentrant AT. Conversely, anterior ablation in addi-
tion to lateral block carries the risk of unintended
electrical isolation of the LA appendage, potentially
leading to “immortal” LA and an increased risk of
cardioembolic stroke. Therefore, empirical ablation of
the anterior scar was not performed during the abla-
tion session. If the patient develops anterior scar-
related AT in the future, we will consider anterior
scar ablation after thorough discussion with the pa-
tient,
as
isolation
of
the
LA
appendage
would
necessitate
LA
appendage
closure,
an
additional
intervention. Thus, there is no “perfect solution” in
this scenario, as each strategy carries the risk of
inducing different new arrhythmias (Table 1).
CONCLUSIONS
The successful resolution of PMT through targeted
catheter ablation underscores necessity for precise
diagnostic mapping and tailored ablation strategies
in managing post-TAVR arrhythmias. The present
case suggests potential arrhythmogenicity of TAVR
via
physical
pressure
to
the
anterior
aspect
of
the LA.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The
authors
thank
Akira
Kuramoto, Akari Maehana, Yuko Nakamura, Mihoko
Atarashi, and Yoshiki Seto for their valuable assis-
tance in the creation of the ﬁgure.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Kenta Tsutsui,
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiol-
ogy, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Kaga 2-11-1,
Itabashi, Tokyo 173-8606, Japan. E-mail: tsutsui@med.
teikyo-u.ac.jp.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Natarajan MK, Sheth TN, Wijeysundera HC, et al.
Remote ECG monitoring to reduce complications
following transcatheter aortic valve implantations:
the Redirect TAVI study. Europace. 2022;24(9):
1475–1483.
2. Nozica N, Siontis GCM, Elchinova EG, et al.
Assessment
of
new
onset
arrhythmias
after
transcatheter aortic valve implantation using an
implantable cardiac monitor. Front Cardiovasc
Med. 2022;9:876546.
3. Hioki H, Watanabe Y, Takamura S, Kataoka A,
Sawamura S, Kozuma K. Unexpected cardiac
tamponade due to bleeding from the left atrium
during transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;11(4):e27–e28.
4. Lim
MW,
Morton
M,
Fernando
R,
et
al.
Impact of posterior wall isolation during AF
ablation on the incidence of left atrial ﬂutter.
JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2024;10(7 Pt 2):1620–
1630.
5. Wang XH, Kong LC, Shuang T, Li Z, Pu J. Macro-
reentrant atrial tachycardia after tricuspid or
mitral valve surgery: is there difference in elec-
trophysiological characteristics and effectiveness
of catheter ablation? BMC Cardiovasc Disord.
2021;21(1):538.
6. Mori H, Tsutsui K, Kawano D, Ikeda Y, Kato R.
Peri-mitral ﬂutter with epicardial bypass after
surgical maze procedure. J Arrhythm. 2022;38(3):
465–467.
TABLE 1
Advantages and Disadvantages of Different Approaches to PMT With Extensive Anterior LA Scarring
Advantages
Disadvantages
Anterior line
Therapeutic for anterior scar-related reentrant arrhythmias
besides PMT (ie, local reentry)
Poses a risk of creating iatrogenic biatrial AT, which is often
refractory to drugs or ablation14
Lateral line (present case)
Unlikely to develop iatrogenic biatrial AT
Possibly better long-term AT-free survival15
Sometimes difﬁcult to complete15
Patient is left with a future risk of anterior scar-related
tachycardia
AT ¼ atrial tachycardia; LA ¼ left atrium; PMT ¼ peri-mitral atrial tachycardia.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Tsutsui et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 6 7
Peri-Mitral Atrial Tachycardia Following TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
7. Denham
NC,
Anderson
R,
Nanthakumar K,
Ha ACT, Bhaskaran AP. Atypical atrial ﬂutter:
exploring
the
relationship
between
ibrutinib
chemotherapy and atrial myopathy. HeartRhythm
Case Rep. 2024;10(1):104–108.
8. Cherian TS, Supple G, Smietana J, et al. Idio-
pathic atypical atrial ﬂutter is associated with a
distinct
atriopathy.
JACC
Clin
Electrophysiol.
2021;7(9):1193–1195.
9. Zhu X, Chu H, Li J, et al. New discovery of left
atrial macroreentry tachycardia: originating from
the spontaneous scarring of left atrial anterior
wall. J Interv Cardiol. 2021;2021:2829070.
10. Bakytzhanuly A, Abdrakhmanov A, Seisembekov T,
Smagulova A, Blyalova D. High-density mapping of
multiple atypical atrial ﬂutter. First HD GRID
mapping experience among The Commonwealth
of Independent States. J Arrhythm. 2020;36(4):
771–773.
11. Nogami A, Kurita T, Abe H, et al. JCS/JHRS 2019
guideline on non-pharmacotherapy of cardiac ar-
rhythmias. J Arrhythm. 2021;37(4):709–870.
12. Zaidi A, Kirzner J, Liu CF, et al. Localized re-
entry is a frequent mechanism of de novo atyp-
ical ﬂutter. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2024;10(2):
235–248.
13. Michal P, Bartosz K, Kacper R, et al. Atypical
atrial ﬂutter ablation: follow-up and predictors of
arrhythmia recurrence. Heart Vessels. 2024;39(11):
949–957.
14. Kitamura T, Martin R, Denis A, et al. Charac-
teristics of single-loop macroreentrant biatrial
tachycardia
diagnosed
by
ultrahigh-resolution
mapping system. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol.
2018;11(2):e005558.
15. Neira V, Hanson M, Tso M, et al. Compari-
son of anterior mitral line and mitral isthmus
line
for
ablation
of
mitral
annular
ﬂutter.
J
Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol.
2024;35(7):1480–
1486.
KEY WORDS ablation, perimitral atrial
tachycardia, transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
Tsutsui et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Peri-Mitral Atrial Tachycardia Following TAVR
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 2 9 6 7
6
