
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Acute Iatrogenic Aortic Root Dissection
With Pseudoaneurysm After
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation
William Davalan,a,b Quentin Chatelain, MD,c Stéphanie Tan, MD,d Raoul Bonan, MD,c Nicolas Dürrleman, MD,e
Philippe Charbonneau, MD,f Walid Ben Ali, MD, PHDa,e
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Major complications of transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) remain rare but are associated
with signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality. Aortic dissection typically results from procedural trauma to the aorta.
CASE SUMMARY We describe an iatrogenic aortic root dissection and contained aortic laceration during TAVI pro-
cedure with a 29-mm Evolut FX in an 88-year-old man with a history of coronary artery bypasses. Postprocedural
computed tomography revealed a dissection in the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva with a mediastinal hematoma, evolving
into a well deﬁned pseudoaneurysm (20 mm). The patient received conservative management, resulting in a favorable
clinical outcome.
DISCUSSION This case underscores the importance of preprocedural imaging, precise procedural execution, and close
postprocedural monitoring. Although surgical repair is the standard for aortic dissection, conservative management
may be an effective alternative in selected high risk patients. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103376) © 2025 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An
88-year-old
man
presented
with
generalized
weakness and recurrent episodes of dizziness over
recent
weeks,
in
the
context
of
de
novo
atrial
ﬁbrillation. At the time of presentation, he was
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Conservative management is a viable option
for select TAVI complications.
 Advanced imaging is essential for diagnosis
and follow-up.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103376
From the aMontréal Heart Institute Research Centre, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; bFaculty of Medicine,
McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada; cDepartment of Interventional Cardiology, Montréal Heart Institute, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; dDepartment of Medical Imaging, Montréal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, Mon-
tréal, Québec, Canada; eDepartment of Cardiac Surgery, Montréal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada; and the fDepartment of Vascular Surgery, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montréal, Université de Montréal, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received October 16, 2024; revised manuscript received December 19, 2024, accepted January 3, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
hemodynamically stable with a blood pres-
sure of 113/66 mm Hg, a heart rate of 68 beats/
min, and an oxygen saturation of 96%. Phys-
ical examination revealed no acute abnor-
malities; however, ﬁndings were consistent
with severe symptomatic aortic stenosis (AS).
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient’s medical history was notable for
signiﬁcant coronary artery disease requiring
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) 3
decades earlier. He also had a documented
ﬁrst-degree
atrioventricular
block
with
incomplete right bundle branch block.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The clinical presentation raised the possibility of
several underlying causes, with decompensated heart
failure secondary to severe AS being the primary
consideration. Arrhythmia-related symptoms due to
atrial ﬁbrillation, including potential hemodynamic
compromise, also were evaluated. Noncardiac etiol-
ogies, such as neurogenic or metabolic disturbances
contributing to dizziness, were considered in the
comprehensive differential diagnosis, although with
a lower degree of clinical probability.
INVESTIGATIONS
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a normal
left ventricular ejection fraction with severe calciﬁed
AS
(aortic
valve
area:
0.86
cm2;
mean
pressure
gradient: 45 mm Hg), and moderate tricuspid regur-
gitation. There was no evidence of aortic dilation at
the level of the sinuses of Valsalva or in the proximal
ascending aorta. Preprocedural computed tomogra-
phy (CT) demonstrated severe calciﬁed AS (area:
410 mm2; perimeter: 73 mm) in a horizontal aortic
root (52), with patent bilateral transfemoral access,
as well as incidental ﬁndings of an infrarenal saccular
abdominal aortic aneurysm (37  26 mm) (Figure 1).
The patient was referred to our institution’s heart
team and was deemed eligible for a transfemoral
transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI).
MANAGEMENT
A transfemoral TAVI procedure was performed with
a 29-mm Evolut FX valve (Medtronic). Primary ac-
cess was established at the right common femoral
artery with an 18-F Gore Dryseal introducer owing to
severe
atherosclerotic
disease
in
the
abdominal
aorta. The aortic valve was crossed with the use of
an AL-1 catheter and a straight 0.035-inch guidewire,
followed by the placement of an extra-small Safari
guidewire (Boston Scientiﬁc) in the left ventricle.
The initial deployment attempt resulted in valve
embolization
at
80%
deployment
owing
to
the
patient’s horizontal aortic root anatomy, but a sec-
ond deployment was successful and deemed to be
stable
(Figure
2,
Videos
1
to
3).
The
procedure
resulted
in
a
marked
reduction
in
the
pressure
gradient from 41 to 7 mm Hg, with no evidence of
paravalvular leak on the ﬁnal aortogram. However,
during the procedure, a possible aortic root dissec-
tion and probable contained aortic laceration was
noted
in
the
noncoronary
sinus.
The
patient
remained hemodynamically stable throughout the
entire
procedure,
with
intraprocedural
“quick
look” transthoracic echocardiography conﬁrming the
absence of pericardial effusion. Closure of the pri-
mary access was performed with a Manta (Teleﬂex)
device, and a 6-F AngioSeal (Terumo) was used for
the secondary femoral access.
Immediate postprocedural CT conﬁrmed an aortic
root dissection of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva
and acute mediastinal hematoma surrounding the
aortic root, extending along the right atrioventricular
groove and the right coronary artery (Figure 3A). The
VISUAL SUMMARY
Timeline
CABG ¼ coronary artery bypass grafting; CT ¼ computed tomography; DOAC ¼ direct oral anticoagulant; F/U ¼ follow-up; POD ¼ postoperative day;
TAVI ¼ transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AS = aortic stenosis
CABG = coronary artery bypass
grafting
CT = computed tomography
POD = postprocedural day
TAVI = transcatheter aortic
valve implantation
TEVAR = thoracic
endovascular aortic repair
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
Davalan et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 5
Aortic Dissection With Pseudoaneurysm After TAVI
A P R I L 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 6
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
patient was not considered to be a suitable surgical
candidate
for
aortic
dissection
repair
owing
to
extensive aortic calciﬁcations. Despite the presence
of an aortic dissection and mediastinal hematoma, he
remained hemodynamically stable after the proced-
ure. Initial blood pressure management included
intravenous nitroglycerine to maintain systolic blood
pressure under 110 mm Hg, aiming to reduce stress on
the aortic wall and prevent expansion of the dissec-
tion. On postoperative day (POD) 1, 7.25 mg daily oral
amlodipine was started for continued blood pressure
management,
aimed
at
mitigating
further
aortic
complications. Transthoracic echocardiography per-
formed 24 hours after the procedure revealed a mild
paravalvular leak localized at the 3 o’clock position
(Figure 4). On POD 2, CT revealed a well deﬁned
pseudoaneurysm (16  19  20 mm) with a small neck
(1 mm), with a surrounding hematoma or acute
thrombus (11 mm), communicating with the non-
coronary sinus of Valsalva at the site of dissection
(Figures 3B and 3C). In addition, the patient developed
a new-onset left bundle branch block accompanied by
a prolonged PR interval in sinus rhythm and slow-rate
atrial ﬁbrillation, leading to the decision to implant a
permanent pacemaker. Nitroglycerine was tapered
and discontinued by POD 2 as blood pressure stabi-
lized, allowing for the initiation of low-dose carve-
dilol. On the fourth day after TAVI, CT conﬁrmed a
decrease in the size of the pseudoaneurysm and
associated hematoma (Figure 3D), and the patient was
deemed to be stable for discharge with a scheduled
outpatient follow-up at the transcatheter valve ther-
apy clinic.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
At
the
ﬁrst
outpatient
follow-up,
7
days
after
discharge, there was complete thrombosis of the
FIGURE 1
Preprocedural Imaging Evaluation for Aortic Valve Intervention
Preprocedural aortic valve evaluation (A) from computed tomography, showing axial and coronal views for TAVI planning, with (B) 3-dimensional reconstruction of the
aortic anatomy for spatial assessment, and (C) detailed measurements. (D) Angiographic imaging simulation with aortic angulation of 52.
FIGURE 2
Fluoroscopic Visualization of Valve Deployment in
the Aortic Annulus
Deployment of the 29-mm Evolut FX valve within the aortic
annulus complex, visualized with procedural contrast
ﬂuoroscopy.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 5
Davalan et al
A P R I L 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 6
Aortic Dissection With Pseudoaneurysm After TAVI
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
FIGURE 3
Serial CT Imaging of Aortic Dissection Progression Following TAVI
Postprocedural computed tomographic (CT) assessments of aortic dissection progression (A) immediately after TAVI and (B) on the second day after TAVI. (C) Three-
dimensional aortic anatomy reconstruction on the second day after TAVI. (D) CT on the fourth day after TAVI.
FIGURE 4
Echocardiographic Doppler Assessment Showing Mild Paravalvular Leak 1-Day Post-TAVI
Transthoracic echocardiography with color Doppler demonstrating mild paravalvular leak at the 3 o’clock position on postoperative day 1.
Davalan et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 5
Aortic Dissection With Pseudoaneurysm After TAVI
A P R I L 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 6
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
dissection’s false lumen (Figure 5A); however, the
patient experienced a recurrence of atrial ﬁbrillation,
and a low dose of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs)
was resumed. At the most recent follow-up, 2 months
after procedure, the patient exhibited complete res-
olution of the focal dissection ﬂap, with no evidence
of
ongoing
aortic
dissection
despite
the
DOACs
(Figure 5B).
DISCUSSION
TAVI has emerged as an effective less invasive treat-
ment option for patients with severe symptomatic AS
across the entire surgical risk spectrum. The rapidly
expanding use of TAVI has driven signiﬁcant ad-
vances that have greatly enhanced its safety and
effectiveness,
but
periprocedural
complications
remain a concern. Although major complications,
such
as
annulus
rupture
and
ascending
aortic
dissection, occur in only approximately 0.6%-1.9% of
TAVI cases,1 these events carry signiﬁcant implica-
tions for both morbidity and mortality.2 Ascending
aortic dissection,2,3 in particular, is associated with a
high mortality rate of approximately 7% in the ﬁrst
hour after symptom onset and rises to as much as
90% by 24 hours.4 The primary mechanism underly-
ing
ascending
aortic
dissection
is
predominantly
associated with procedural trauma to the aorta,3
typically resulting from transcatheter heart valve
(THV) device deployment or procedural manipula-
tion,
including
guidewire
and
delivery
system
manipulations, valve repositioning, retrieval, retrac-
tion, or post-dilation.
We present a patient who developed an iatrogenic
aortic
root
dissection
and
pseudoaneurysm
after
TAVI,
likely
precipitated
by
the
direct
contact
between the self-expanding 29-mm Evolut FX valve
stent and the patient’s narrow calciﬁed horizontal
aortic anatomy. Although preprocedural CT did not
reveal excessive calciﬁcation at the level of the
sinuses of Valsalva or ascending aorta, the patient’s
horizontal
aortic
root
anatomy
posed
signiﬁcant
procedural challenges. The angulation between the
left ventricular outﬂow tract and the ascending aorta
increases stress on the greater curvature of the
ascending aorta during guidewire and delivery sys-
tem manipulation. Furthermore, the unsuccessful
initial deployment of the THV, requiring retrieval and
recapture, likely compounded the risk of localized
trauma to the aortic wall. These factors, combined
with the patient’s complex anatomy, were likely
contributors to the development of the aortic root
dissection and mediastinal hematoma observed in
this case.
Cases of iatrogenic aortic dissection after TAVI
have been documented, with dissections occurring
FIGURE 5
Computed Tomography Demonstrating Complete Resolution of Aortic Dissection After TAVI
(A) Postprocedural computed tomography showing complete aortic dissection resolution on the eleventh day following TAVI and
(B) 3-dimensional aortic anatomy reconstruction at the latest follow-up (1.5 months after TAVI).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 5
Davalan et al
A P R I L 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 6
Aortic Dissection With Pseudoaneurysm After TAVI
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
either intraoperatively5-7 or even days to years after
the
procedure.8
Risk
factors
include
complex
anatomic features, such as heavily calciﬁed plaques,
horizontal
aortic
root
angulation,
and
extensive
atherosclerosis,
which
increase
susceptibility
to
localized
trauma
during
procedural
techniques.
Therefore,
careful
assessment
of
the
ascending
aorta’s anatomy is crucial, especially when large
calciﬁed plaques are present along the greater cur-
vature.
These
plaques
can
serve
as
sources
for
thromboembolism and increase the risk of dissection.
Key strategies to mitigate those challenges include
comprehensive CT imaging to assess anatomic angu-
lation and plan an optimal device trajectory. Flexible
atraumatic guidewires such as the extra-small Safari
(Boston Scientiﬁc) can help to minimize mechanical
stress on the aortic wall, and alternative THV plat-
forms,
such
as
balloon-expandable
systems
(eg,
Edwards Sapien 3) or repositionable systems, may
offer enhanced stability and reduce the need for
repeated manipulations. The decision to use the
Evolut FX in the present case was guided by the
operator’s preference and expertise with the plat-
form. Ultimately, avoiding multiple recapture at-
tempts and ensuring precise alignment during initial
deployment are critical for optimizing outcomes and
minimizing the risk of iatrogenic injury.
Management of an iatrogenic aortic root dissection
remains complex and controversial, especially in
patients who are considered to be inoperable or at
high surgical risk. Although patients with ascending
aorta dissections not related to TAVI are typically
referred for surgical intervention, limited data exist
on managing dissections that occur during TAVI,
making personalized clinical decision making essen-
tial. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) is
the preferred nonsurgical treatment for aortic dis-
sections, although its use is typically conﬁned to type
B dissections. In certain cases, bailout techniques
involving TAVI have been explored for managing
aortic
root
ruptures.
For
example,
one
report
described the successful sealing of an iatrogenic
ascending aortic dissection after balloon aortic val-
vuloplasty with the use of a self-expanding TAVI
prosthesis.9 In addition, a valve-in-valve technique
has been documented, wherein a second prosthesis
was deployed to address a ventricular septal defect
resulting from an aortic root rupture.10 Although
these techniques can occasionally offer viable solu-
tions, their utility remains limited to highly speciﬁc
scenarios and they are generally less reliable as a
routine intervention strategy.
In the present case, a conservative approach with
careful
blood
pressure
monitoring
was
selected,
driven not only by the patient’s stable hemodynamic
proﬁle and the contained thrombosis within the false
lumen of the pseudoaneurysm by the second POD, but
also by the nonfeasibility of surgical repair. Although
standard care for ascending aortic dissection typically
involves open surgical repair, the surgical risks in this
patient were deemed to be greater than those associ-
ated with medical management alone. Speciﬁcally,
the patient’s extensive aortic calciﬁcations, history of
CABG with resultant pericardial adhesions, and high
surgical risk precluded the possibility of open repair,
thereby necessitating a personalized medical man-
agement strategy. Notably, the patient’s previous
CABG intervention had resulted in pericardial adhe-
sions, which provided additional reassurance that the
rupture would likely remain contained. TEVAR was
deemed unsuitable owing to the proximity of the
dissection entry point to the ostium of the right cor-
onary
artery,
where
intervention
could
have
compromised coronary perfusion. As a contingency,
we considered plugging the neck of the dissection ﬂap
if pseudoaneurysm expansion occurred; however, the
inframillimeter neck size posed signiﬁcant challenges
for device positioning and stability. Given that our
patient exhibited no major hemodynamic compro-
mise, no pericardial effusion, minimal ﬂow in the false
lumen, and a dissection limited to the outer curve of
the ascending aorta, conservative medical manage-
ment alone resulted in the successful control and
resolution of the aortic dissection. However, it is
worth noting that elderly TAVI patients often exhibit
less pronounced symptoms, making CT essential for
the accurate detection and assessment of these com-
plications. Regardless of the chosen management
pathway, all patients experiencing an aortic dissec-
tion after TAVI should receive intensive medical
therapy focused on strict heart rate and blood pres-
sure control.3
CONCLUSIONS
This case presents a unique instance of an aortic root
dissection caused by the deployment of a THV during
TAVI. In this case, a conservative approach with
vigilant
hemodynamic
monitoring
proved
to
be
effective, resulting in the complete resolution of the
dissection ﬂap and thrombosis of the pseudoaneur-
ysm on follow-up. This highlights the importance of
personalized management strategies for patients who
are poor surgical candidates and reinforces the role of
imaging modalities such as CT for early detection and
continuous monitoring. As TAVI continues to evolve
and
expand
across
broader
patient
populations,
further research is needed to reﬁne management
Davalan et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 5
Aortic Dissection With Pseudoaneurysm After TAVI
A P R I L 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 6
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
strategies for high-risk vascular complications in
complex cases.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Walid Ben
Ali, Department of Cardiac Surgery, Montréal Heart
Institute,
Université
de
Montréal,
5000
Belanger
Street, Montréal H1T 1C8, Québec, Canada. E-mail:
dr.walidbenali@gmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Holmes DR Jr, Matthew Brennan J, Rumsfeld JS,
et al. Clinical outcomes at 1 year following trans-
catheter
aortic
valve
replacement.
JAMA.
2015;313(10):1019–1028.
2. Chiappini B, Schepens M, Tan E, et al. Early and
late outcomes of acute type A aortic dissection:
analysis of risk factors in 487 consecutive patients.
Eur Heart J. 2005;26(2):180–186.
3. Langer NB, Hamid NB, Nazif TM, et al. Injuries
to the aorta, aortic annulus, and left ventricle
during transcatheter aortic valve replacement
management and outcomes. Circ Cardiovasc Interv.
2017;10(1):e004735.
4. Mehta RH, Suzuki T, Hagan PG, et al. Predicting
death in patients with acute type A aortic dissec-
tion. Circulation. 2002;105(2):200–206.
5. Geile J, Doberentz E, Madea B. Rapid develop-
ment of an iatrogenic aortic dissection following
transcatheter aortic valve implantation. Forensic
Sci Med Pathol. 2020;16(2):335–339.
6. Ong SH, Mueller R, Gerckens U. Iatrogenic
dissection of the ascending aorta during TAVI
sealed with the CoreValve revalving prosthesis.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2011;77(6):910–914.
7. Fujita H, Ito T, Kikuchi S, Seo Y. Postprocedural
ascending aortic dissection after transcatheter
aortic valve implantation: a case report. Eur Heart
J Case Rep. 2022;7(1):ytac486.
8. Gerber RT, Osborn M, Mikhail GW. Delayed
mortality from aortic dissection post transcatheter
aortic valve implantation (TAVI): the tip of the
iceberg. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2010;76(2):
202–204.
9. Cangut B, Greason KL. Treatment of iatrogenic
acute aortic type A aortic dissection complicating
transcatheter aortic valve insertion: a case report.
JTCVS Tech. 2020;3:68–69.
10. Barbanti M, Yang TH, Rodes Cabau J, et al.
Anatomical and procedural features associated
with
aortic
root
rupture
during
balloon-
expandable transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment. Circulation. 2013;128(3):244–253.
KEY WORDS aortic dissection, case report,
pseudoaneurysm, transcatheter aortic valve
implantation
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 5
Davalan et al
A P R I L 2 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 6
Aortic Dissection With Pseudoaneurysm After TAVI
7
