
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Orthotopic Left Main Chimney Stenting to
Prevent Stent Compression After
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
Ruxandra I. Sava, MD,a,b Hakim Benamer, MD,a Julien Quillet, MD,a Maximilien Sochala, MD,a
Philippe M. Garot, MD,a Mariama Akodad, MD, PHDa
ABSTRACT
Coronary obstruction (CO) is a severe complication of transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR). An 80-year-old
woman presenting with severe aortic stenosis was referred for TAVR. A preprocedural computed tomography revealed risk
factors for CO: narrow aortic root and borderline-low coronary height. During TAVR, both coronaries were protected. After
transcatheter heart valve (THV) implantation, contrast staining of the left sinus and leaﬂet interaction with the left main
(LM) ostium were noted, prompting LM stenting to prevent obstruction. Because the THV–aorta space was virtual, we opted
for rewiring and LM stenting through a THV cell. A postprocedural computed tomograohy revealed a permeable, well-
expanded stent. Chimney stenting between the THV and aorta may be unfeasible in patients with a narrow aorta because of
a risk of stent compression. Orthotopic chimney stenting through a THV cell may be preferable to classic chimney stenting
in patients with a narrow aorta and minimal THV–aorta space. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103286) © 2025 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 80-year-old woman presented with worsening
dyspnea and aortic systolic murmur. Transthoracic
echocardiography revealed severe aortic stenosis,
with a peak aortic velocity of 4.07 m/s, mean trans-
aortic gradient of 48 mm Hg, and an indexed aortic
valve area measuring 0.4 cm/m2. The left ventricle
was not dilated, was mildly hypertrophied, and had a
preserved ejection fraction. Her history was negative
for angina or syncope. Considering her age and
frailty, the patient was referred for transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR).
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient was overweight and had a history of hy-
pertension treated by sartan and a diuretic, chronic
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 In
patients
at
imminent
risk
of
TAVR-
associated coronary obstruction in which
leaﬂet laceration cannot be performed and in
which a narrow initial aorta renders stenting
between the THV and the aorta unfeasible
because of the risk of obstruction, recathe-
terization of the coronary artery through the
THV cells using a second guidewire and
subsequent stenting, termed orthotopic
chimney stenting, may represent a viable
alternative.
 Chimney stenting during TAVR should be
restricted to patients in which coronary
obstruction is deemed imminent, because it
renders future coronary access and redo
TAVR challenging.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103286
From the aInstitut Cardiovasculaire Paris Sud (Interventional Cardiology), Hôpital Privé Jacques Cartier, Massy, France; and the
bCentre Hospitalier Universitaire, Interventional Cardiology, Saint-Etienne, France.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received September 13, 2024; revised manuscript received October 28, 2024, accepted November 19, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 9 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
obstructive pulmonary disease managed by
long-acting bronchodilators, and a benign
breast cyst treated by surgical removal. The
patient was at intermediate surgical risk,
with a EuroSCORE II of 2.25% and a Society of
Thoracic Surgeons score of 5.9%.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Cardiac amyloidosis associated with severe
aortic stenosis was considered. However,
transthoracic
echocardiography
did
not
reveal any suggestive features.
INVESTIGATIONS
The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm of 66
beats/min, a PR interval of 200 ms, and narrow QRS
complexes with no signiﬁcant repolarization abnor-
mality. Blood tests excluded anemia, renal, and he-
patic failure.
Multidetector
computed
tomography
(CT)
was
performed to assess adequacy for TAVR and for pre-
procedural planning and revealed a narrow aortic root
(Figures
1A
to
1D).
The
annulus
area
measured
426.7 mm2, and the area-derived mean diameter was
23.3 mm (Figure 1A). The mean diameters of the si-
nuses
of
Valsalva,
sinotubular
junction,
and
ascending aorta were 28 mm, 25 mm, and 26 mm,
respectively. The sinotubular junction height was
14 mm. The left main (LM) height was 9 mm, which
was lower than the left coronary cusp height of
11 mm. The right coronary artery (RCA) height was
11 mm, equal to the right coronary cusp height
(Figures 1A to 1C). Because this patient presented with
multiple factors for coronary obstruction (CO) after
TAVR and no anatomical factors precluded the use of
a balloon-expandable valve, we opted for a 23-mm
Sapien
S3
Ultra
valve
(Edwards
Lifesciences)
because its shorter frame and intra-annular valve
position may favor coronary perfusion and repeat
catheterization. We thus simulated this valve to
calculate the valve-to-coronary distance, which was
similarly low for both the LM and RCA (3.5 mm and
3 mm, respectively) (Figure 1D). The common femoral
artery measured 7 mm on both sides, with high
bifurcation. No signiﬁcant tortuosity or calciﬁcation
was noted along the iliofemoral or aortic vessels,
making the patient eligible for transfemoral TAVR.
A recently published algorithm described a new
multivariate model to predict TAVR-associated CO
in
patients
with
a
cusp
height
higher
than
a
coronary height and a simulated valve-to-coronary
distance <4 mm or a culprit leaﬂet calcium volume
>600 mm3.1 Based on this algorithm, the patient was
deemed at high risk for LM obstruction.
MANAGEMENT
We
proceeded
with
transfemoral
TAVR
with
a
23-mm Sapien S3U transcatheter heart valve (THV).
Both
coronary
arteries
were
protected
with
0.014-inch coronary guidewires using an EBU3 6-F
catheter for the LM and a JR4 6-F catheter for the
RCA. Stents were not parked on these guidewires,
because the patient was considered ineligible for
“classic” or heterotopic chimney stenting due to
the
narrow
sinuses,
sinotubular
junction,
and
ascending aorta, which would likely lead to stent
compression.
To further reduce the risk of CO, we targeted a
low THV implant (70:30). After valve deployment,
both
coronary
arteries
were
patent.
However,
contrast staining was noted in the left sinus, and the
radiolucent leaﬂet appeared to be interacting with
the LM ostium (Figure 1E, Video 1). A decision was
then made to proceed with LM orthotopic chimney
stenting. The initial LM guidewire was left in place
to
ensure
coronary
patency.
Using
a
ping-pong
technique with a second 6-F EBU3 catheter, the LM
was catheterized through an upper cell of the THV
(Figure 1F). A 4.5-mm drug-eluting stent was then
implanted
from
the
LM
back
into
the
aorta
(Figure 1G, Video 2). The stent appeared to be well
expanded, contrast injection revealed proper LM
ﬁlling, and the electrocardiographic tracing was un-
modiﬁed. The RCA did not appear to be at risk for
obstruction after retraction of the coronary protec-
tion guidewire, and thus chimney stenting was not
attempted.
Immediate postprocedural transthoracic echocar-
diography showed excellent hemodynamics, with a
mean gradient of 7 mm Hg and minimal aortic
regurgitation. Thus, the procedure was concluded at
this stage.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
A control CT was performed on the second post-
operative day to assess THV orientation and LM
chimney stent (Figures 1H and 1I). The THV commis-
sures were aligned with the native commissures. The
THV extended above the sinotubular junction. The
stent appeared to be well expanded, with no signs of
external compression. The RCA was patent and arose
in front of an open cell (Figures 1J and 1K). The hos-
pital stay was uneventful, and the patient was dis-
charged 3 days later. A second postprocedural CT
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CO = coronary obstruction
CT = computed tomography
LM = left main
RCA = right coronary artery
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
Sava et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 9 , 2 0 2 5
Orthotopic Chimney Stenting
M A Y 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 8 6
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
FIGURE 1
Preprocedural Computed Tomography
(A) Native annulus measurements. (B and C) Blue line depicting the left and right coronary cusp plane. (D) Simulation of a 23-mm S3U valve
revealed a small right coronary artery (RCA) and left main (LM) valve-to-coronary distance, suggesting a high risk of post-TAVR coronary
obstruction. TAVR Procedure. (E) Contrast stagnation in the left coronary sinus, suggesting sinus sequestration. (F) LM wiring through the
valve cell using a second guiding catheter. (G) Permeable orthotopic chimney stent. Postprocedural computed tomography (H and I) LM
stent extending through the open valve cell, sagittal view, and 3-dimensional reconstruction. (J and K) Permeable RCA in front of the open
cell. Note the optimal valve alignment. LCC ¼ left coronary cusp; RCC ¼ right coronary cusp; TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement;
VTC ¼ valve-to-coronary distance.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 9 , 2 0 2 5
Sava et al
M A Y 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 8 6
Orthotopic Chimney Stenting
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
performed
at
30
days
similarly
showed
a
well-
expanded stent and the absence of hypoattenuated
leaﬂet thickening.
DISCUSSION
CO after TAVR is a rare but severe complication, with
30-day
mortality
as
high
as
50%.2
Investigators
reporting outcomes from patients included in the
Chimney Registry found that the absence of coronary
protection was the only independent predictor of the
combined endpoint of death, myocardial infarction,
and cardiogenic shock.2 Thus, coronary protection by
wiring should be performed in all patients considered
at risk of TAVR-associated CO. Preprocedural CT
simulation has been shown to accurately predict the
risk
of
CO.1,3
Parameters
such
as
coronary
height <10 mm, valve-to-coronary distance <4 mm,
VTA <2 mm, and sinus width <30 mm have been
shown to predict the risk of TAVR-associated CO. In
high-risk patients, the BASILICA trial4 demonstrated
that leaﬂet laceration techniques are effective in
preventing acute CO during TAVR. However, angio-
graphic evidence of partial ostial CO in spite of
BASILICA led the operator to stent the coronary
ostium in 2 patients (7%).5 These ﬁndings echo reg-
istry data that reported a rate of 4.3% of delayed COs
in patients who received coronary protection by
guidewire placement but were not stented.6
Ideally, patients at risk of CO should be considered
for surgical AVR and, if ineligible, should beneﬁt from
leaﬂet
modiﬁcation
before
TAVR.
However,
the
BASILICA technique was not available in our center.
In the absence of leaﬂet laceration, patients judged to
be at imminent risk of CO based on the combined
ﬁndings of preprocedural CT and postimplantation
aortography should receive preemptive stenting.
In patients with a narrow initial aorta, there may be
insufﬁcient space to implant a stent between the THV
frame and the aorta, rendering heterotopic chimney
stenting unfeasible. Stent compression in the setting
of heterotopic chimney stenting has been described
both on the bench7 and clinically.2 In such patients,
leaving the initial guidewire in place to secure coro-
nary perfusion, followed by repeat catheterization
with a second guidewire and stenting through the
valve cells, may represent a viable alternative to
heterotopic chimney stenting. We implanted our
stent with a large protrusion into the aorta because
we wanted to avoid systolic occlusion of the stent by
valve leaﬂet. On re-examination of the case, we
believe a shorter protrusion, sufﬁcient to surpass the
outﬂow of the valve, would have been sufﬁcient and
would have reduced the difﬁculty of rewiring in case
of need for coronary reaccess.
As compared with heterotopic chimney stenting,
the orthotopic approach may pose several advan-
tages, such as reduced risk for compression, more
physiological blood ﬂow into the coronary arteries,
and easier repeat catheterization when compared
with heterotopic chimney stenting.8 As compared
with leaﬂet laceration techniques, chimney stenting
may represent an alternative in patients with severely
depressed left ventricular ejection fraction, because
the latter may cause temporary severe aortic insufﬁ-
ciency leading to hemodynamic compromise.
Major limitations of this technique include leaﬂet
interaction with the chimney stent, which carry the
hypothetical risk of hypoattenuated leaﬂet thick-
ening, leaﬂet injury, and premature valvular degen-
eration. Long-term data on these outcomes are not
yet available. However, a 30-day CT did not reveal the
presence of hypoattenuated leaﬂet thickening in this
patient. An additional limitation is a difﬁcult redo
TAVR procedure, which would require stent cathe-
terization and balloon parking in the artery ostium to
ensure ostial protection after the second THV im-
plantation, followed by repeat orthotopic chimney
stenting through the cells of the new valve frame.
This was recently demonstrated by Dreger et al,9 who
reported a case of redo TAVR in a patient who had
previously been treated by classic chimney stenting,
where the authors were able to wire the old stent
through a side cell and successfully implant an
orthotopic chimney stent through the cells of the
second THV. Another important concern is the ideal
duration of double antiplatelet therapy. Although
little data are available to guide this decision, we
prescribed double antiplatelet therapy for at least 1
year, to be prolonged if well tolerated. In the COR-
PROTAVR registry study, most chimney stented pa-
tients
(59.5%)
were
prescribed
extended
double
antiplatelet therapy. Stent thrombosis was docu-
mented in only 2 of 143 patients: the ﬁrst occurred
1
day
post-TAVR
implantation
and
the
second
occurred 494 days later, under single antiplatelet
therapy.6
CONCLUSIONS
Thorough preprocedural evaluation is required to
prevent TAVR-associated CO. A narrow aortic root
together with low coronary take-off are major risk
factors for CO. Surgical AVR should represent the ﬁrst
choice in such patients. In patients ineligible for
surgical AVR or in TAVR candidates for which leaﬂet
Sava et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 9 , 2 0 2 5
Orthotopic Chimney Stenting
M A Y 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 8 6
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
modiﬁcation
or
classic
chimney
stenting
is
not
feasible, orthotopic chimney stenting through the
THV struts may represent an alternative for patients
in which the narrow aortic anatomy precludes the use
of classic, heterotopic chimney stenting.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Sava was supported by an Education and Training Grant from the
European Association of Percutaneous Cardiovascular Interventions.
Dr Garot reports being a proctor or consultant for Abbott, Boston
Scientiﬁc, Biosensors, Cordis, GE HealthCare, and Terumo; he serves
as a Medical Co-Director and is a shareholder of Cardiovascular Eu-
ropean Research Center (CERC), a CRO dedicated to cardiovascular
diseases; he is a shareholder of Basecamp Vascular and Electroducer.
Dr Akodad is a consultant for Edwards Lifesciences, Medtronic, and
Abbott. All other authors have reported that they have no relation-
ships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Mariama
Akodad, Institut Cardiovasculaire Paris Sud, Hôpital Privé
Jacques Cartier, Ramsay Santé, 6 Avenue du Noyer
Lambert, 91300 Massy, France. E-mail: m.akodad@icps.
com.fr.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Khan JM, Kamioka N, Lisko JC, et al. Coronary
obstruction from TAVR in native aortic stenosis:
development and validation of multivariate predic-
tion model. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2023;16(4):415–
425. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCIN.2022.11.018
2. Mercanti F, Rosseel L, Neylon A, et al. chimney
stenting for coronary occlusion during TAVR: in-
sights from the Chimney Registry. JACC Cardiovasc
Interv.
2020;13(6):751–761.
https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.JCIN.2020.01.227
3. Ribeiro HB, Rodés-Cabau J, Blanke P, et al.
Incidence, predictors, and clinical outcomes of
coronary
obstruction
following
transcatheter
aortic valve replacement for degenerative bio-
prosthetic surgical valves: insights from the VIVID
registry.
Eur
Heart
J.
2018;39(8):687–695.
https://doi.org/10.1093/EURHEARTJ/EHX455
4. Khan JM, Greenbaum AB, Babaliaros VC, et al.
The
BASILICA
trial:
prospective
multicenter
investigation of intentional leaﬂet laceration to
prevent TAVR coronary obstruction. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2019;12(13):1240–1252. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JCIN.2019.03.035
5. Kitamura M, Wilde J, Dumpies O, et al. Risk
assessment of coronary obstruction during trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement: insights from
post-BASILICA computed tomography. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2022;15(5):496–507. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JCIN.2022.01.003
6. Palmerini T, Chakravarty T, Saia F, et al. Coro-
nary protection to prevent coronary obstruction
during TAVR: a multicenter international registry.
JACC
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2020;13(6):739–747.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCIN.2019.11.024
7. Brown CL, White J, Stinis CT, Teirstein PS. Chim-
ney/snorkel stenting during TAV-in-TAV: bedside to
bench. EuroIntervention. 2024;20(11):e728–e729.
https://doi.org/10.4244/EIJ-D-23-00927
8. Burzotta F, Kovacevic M, Aurigemma C, et al.
An “orthotopic” snorkel-stenting technique to
maintain coronary patency during transcatheter
aortic valve replacement. Cardiovasc Revasc Med.
2021;28S:94–97.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CAR-
REV.2020.12.013
9. Dreger H, Al Harbi AS, Geyer T, et al. TAVR-in-
TAVR in a patient with a 12-year-old chimney stent:
the inverted culotte double chimney technique.
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2024;17(15):1846–1848.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCIN.2024.05.037
KEY WORDS coronary obstruction,
orthotopic chimney, TAVR
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 9 , 2 0 2 5
Sava et al
M A Y 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 8 6
Orthotopic Chimney Stenting
5
