
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
HOW WE DID IT
Prediction of Prosthetic Heart Valve
Interaction During Transcatheter
Double-Valve Replacement Using
a Bench Model
Vasu Nandhakumar, MD, DNB, FNB, Aashish Chopra, MD, DM, Vignesh Gomathinayagam, MD, DNB, FNB,
Mullasari S. Ajit, MD, DM
ABSTRACT
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement in the presence of a preexisting bioprosthetic mitral valve can lead to signiﬁcant
interaction of the valves. Simultaneous transcatheter aortic valve and mitral valve deployment using balloon-expandable
systems further complicates the interaction. We describe preprocedural computed tomography planning using novel
parameters and bench tests to predict these interactions and their clinical signiﬁcance. On the basis of the available
anecdotal evidence, we propose a new classiﬁcation system for the various types of interactions. (JACC Case Rep.
2025;30:103370) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
T
ranscatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
with a preexisting bioprosthetic mitral valve
(BPMV) is an exclusion criterion in landmark
trials because of the possibility of an interaction of
the
transcatheter
aortic
valve
(TAV)
with
the
BPMV.1,2 Amat-Santos et al3 studied the interaction
of a mechanical mitral valve and a BPMV while per-
forming TAVR. TAVR device embolization was seen
in 6.7% of the procedures as a result of its interaction
with BPMV. Here we describe step-by-step procedural
planning to predict prosthetic valve interactions by
using novel computed tomography (CT) parameters
and bench model simulations from 3 patients who
underwent simultaneous TAVR and mitral valve-in-
valve (M-ViV) implantation.
CASE SUMMARY
All 3 patients with native severe aortic stenosis (AS)
and a degenerated BPMV were deemed high risk for
open
heart
surgery
(mean
European
System
for
Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation II [EuroSCORE II]:
21.7  15.21) by a heart team and were scheduled for
simultaneous TAVR and M-ViV implantation. These
patients had NYHA functional class III or IV symp-
toms. The degenerated BPMV had been implanted
140  60.75 months earlier. All 3 patients had right
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Combined transcatheter aortic and mitral
valve replacement using the currently avail-
able BE platforms may lead to valve
interactions.
 CT measurements between the aVBR, the
BPMV sewing ring, and its posts are para-
mount to perform transcatheter left-sided
DVR safely.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103370
From the Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardio-Vascular Diseases, The Madras Medical Mission Hospital, Chennai, India.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received November 30, 2024; accepted January 6, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
ventricular dysfunction, and 2 of them had
additional left ventricular dysfunction. The
operators decided to perform a simultaneous
double-valve replacement (DVR) rather than
taking a sequential approach in all 3 patients
because leaving 1 valve unaddressed could
lead to potential hemodynamic consequences
in the presence of left or right ventricular
dysfunction.
PROCEDURAL STEPS
CASE 1. According to the CT assessment, the
distance between the aortic virtual basal ring
(aVBR) and the degenerated 27-mm Biocor (St
Jude Medical) BPMV sewing ring was 3.1 mm,
thus
mandating
TAV
deployment
with
a
precise 1- to 3-mm depth to avoid interac-
tion. The operators hence decided to choose
the balloon-expandable (BE) platform for TAVR. The
M-ViV procedure was planned with a BE platform.
If TAVR is performed after M-ViV implantation, the
balloon of the BE TAV will compress the transcatheter
mitral valve (TMV) stent frame. If self-expandable
(SE) TAV is used after M-ViV, it will not interact
with the TMV frame, but if predilation or post-
dilatation is required, then the balloon will compress
the TMV frame. Hence, a TAVR ﬁrst and M-ViV sec-
ond approach is ideal with either of these TAV plat-
forms. During BE TAVR, balloon interaction with the
projected BPMV post into the left ventricular outﬂow
tract (LVOT) is possible. To predict this in our cases,
the following novel CT parameters (Table 1) were
measured: the aVBR to BPMV sewing ring distance
(3.1 mm) (Figure 1A); the distance between aVBR and
BPMV near the post (8.3 mm) (Figure 1B); the BPMV
post
to
interventricular
septum
(IVS)
distance
(13.5
mm)
(Figure
1C);
the
BPMV
post
position,
VISUAL SUMMARY
Classiﬁcation of Left-Sided Prosthetic Valve Interactions
M1: The projected transcatheter aortic valve (TAV) balloon in the left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT) is aligned between the 2 lateral anterior posts (favorable
bioprosthetic mitral valve [BPMV] post position) and stretching these posts during the inﬂation. The stretched posts recover to their original position when deﬂating
the TAV balloon. M2: The projected TAV balloon in the LVOT is bending an unfavorable central anterior post of the BPMV that returns to its original shape when
deﬂating the TAV balloon. M3: The projected TAV balloon in the LVOT irreversibly compresses the transcatheter mitral valve (TMV) stent frame. This can affect TMV
function or lead to TMV embolization. A1: The TAV system interacts with the projected anterior part of the BPMV sewing ring at the aortomitral continuity. This may
lead to migration of the TAV into the aorta or aortic paravalvular leak.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
aVBR = aortic virtual basal ring
AS = aortic stenosis
BE = balloon-expandable
BPMV = bioprosthetic mitral
valve
CT = computed tomography
DVR = double-valve
replacement
IVS = interventricular septum
LVOT = left ventricular outﬂow
tract
M-ViV = mitral valve-in-valve
SE = self-expandable
TAV = transcatheter aortic
valve
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TMV = transcatheter mitral
valve
Nandhakumar et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
TABLE 1
CT Analysis for Transcatheter Double-Valve Replacement
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Aortic valve
Morphology
Tricuspid
Tricuspid
Type 1 bicuspid, R-L
Annulus area, mm2
374.3
279.1
679.1
Annulus area-derived diameter
22.2
18.9
29.4
Mitral bioprosthetic valve
Name of valve
Biocor (St Jude Medical)
Mosaic (Medtronic)
Perimount (Edwards Lifesciences)
Labeled size, mm
27
25
27
Inner area, mm2
460.6
337.4
489.3
Area-derived inner diameter, mm
24.2
20.7
25.0
Aortomitral inverse angle, 
106.9
111
112.3
Neo-LVOT area at end-systole, mm2 (80:20 simulation)
251.4
268.8
368.6
Novel CT parameters to predict interaction
aVBR to BPMV near post distance, mm
8.3
6.1
8.6
aVBR to BPMV sewing ring distance, mm
3.1
5.5
3.6
BPMV post position relation to LVOT
Favorable lateral anterior
Unfavorable
Central anterior
Favorable lateral anterior
BPMV post-IVS distance, mm
13.5
9.8
10.6
Mean BPMV Interpost distance, mm
15.23
20.73
18.46
aVBR ¼ aortic virtual basal ring; BPMV ¼ bioprosthetic mitral valve; CT ¼ computed tomography; IVS ¼ interventricular septum; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract;
R-L ¼ raphe between the right and left coronary cusps.
FIGURE 1
Computed Tomography Predictors of Prosthetic Valve Interaction for Case 1
(A) Virtual basal ring to bioprosthetic mitral valve sewing ring distance. (B) Virtual basal ring to bioprosthetic mitral valve near post distance. (C) Bioprosthetic mitral
valve post to interventricular septum distance. (D) Bioprosthetic mitral valve interpost distance (arrows). (E) Aortomitral angle. (F) Schematic illustration of a 23-mm
Meril Navigator balloon interacting with the anterior bioprosthetic mitral valve posts (arrows).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Nandhakumar et al
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
according to its favorability or not; and the mean
BPMV interpost distance (15.23 mm) (Figure 1D). The
steps for measuring these parameters are elaborated
in Supplemental Figures 1 to 4.
We simulated the interaction using a bench model.
The bench model was created using the CT aortomi-
tral angle (Figure 1E), the aVBR to BPMV near post
distance, the aVBR to BPMV sewing ring distance, and
favorable lateral anterior BPMV posts (Figure 1F). This
patient had a 27-mm degenerated Biocor mitral valve.
A 27-mm explanted degenerated Biocor valve from a
different patient during redo -surgery was used in the
bench model. The Biocor valve sewing ring and posts
are ﬂexible and deﬂectable, as are all contemporary
surgical bioprosthetic valves (Figures 2A and 2B).
According to the CT measurements, the operators
planned a 23-mm Myval valve (Meril) for AS. Hence a
23-mm Navigator balloon (Meril) was inﬂated in the
bench model’s LVOT. It aligned between the 2 lateral
anterior posts of the mitral Biocor valve during the
initial three-fourths of the inﬂation. During the ﬁnal
one-fourth of the inﬂation, it stretched the posts for a
moment without damaging them (Figures 3A to 3D).
The 23-mm balloon stretched the posts during full
inﬂation because the distance between the posts was
only 20.8 mm. The posts were back to their position
immediately after the deﬂation.
CASE 2. The CT analysis (Table 1) showed an unfa-
vorable central anterior post of a degenerated 25-mm
Mosaic (Medtronic) BPMV projecting into the LVOT
(Figure 4A). With the novel CT parameters as shown
in Figures 4A to 4D, CT simulation revealed a signiﬁ-
cant interaction of the balloon of a BE TAV with the
unfavorable anterior post. The transthoracic echo-
cardiogram and ﬂuoroscopic images show the pro-
jecting central anterior post in the way of the TAV
balloon (Figures 4E and 4F). A bench model was
created in line with the CT measurements as in the
previous case, with an explanted 27-mm degenerated
Hancock II valve (Medtronic) from a different patient
during redo surgery (Figures 5A and 5B). At the time
FIGURE 2
Flexibility and Deﬂectability of the Sewing Ring and Posts of a Biocor and a Hancock II Valve
(A) Manual compression test of an explanted 27-mm Biocor valve (St Jude Medical). Clockwise from the 3-o’clock position, horizontal sewing ring compression, vertical
sewing ring compression, compression of all 3 posts, and recovery to the normal shape are shown. (B) Compression test by Mayo towel clip forceps of a 27-mm
Hancock II valve (Medtronic). Clockwise from the 3-o’clock position, without compression, vertical compression, horizontal compression, and returning to normal shape
are shown. The central image shows the coplanar view of the valve.
Nandhakumar et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
of bench testing, an explanted Mosaic valve was
unavailable;
hence
the
ﬂuoroscopically
closely
mimicking Hancock II valve was chosen for the bench
test. The planned TAV was a 21.5-mm Myval Octacor
valve (Meril). For safety purposes, a 23-mm (1.5-mm
higher than the valve size) Navigator balloon was
inﬂated over 20 seconds in the LVOT of the bench
model. A clear bending of the central anterior post
toward the center of the valve was noted during the
second half of inﬂation; the post returned to its
original
position
immediately
after
deﬂation
(Figures 5C to 5F).
CASE 3. The CT analysis (Table 1, Figures 6A to 6H)
showed favorable lateral anterior posts of a degen-
erated
27-mm
Perimount
(Edwards
Lifesciences)
BPMV in the LVOT. However, the BPMV post to IVS
distance was only 10.6 mm, and the mean BPMV
interpost distance was 18.46 mm. The operators
planned to use a 29-mm Myval valve for TAVR. We
FIGURE 3
Bench Test for Case 1
Transcatheter aortic valve balloon interacting with a 27-mm Biocor mitral valve (St Jude Medical) posts in a favorable position.
(A) Fluoroscopy image of a 27-mm Biocor valve. (B) Bench model shows a sewn Biocor valve at the mitral position with favorable 2 lateral
anterior posts (arrows) on either side of the left ventricular outﬂow tract (star). This model was created with the computed tomography
parameters given in Figure 1. (C) At the beginning of the inﬂation of a 23-mm transcatheter aortic valve balloon in the left ventricular
outﬂow tract, it was ﬁt between the 2 lateral anterior posts (arrows). (D) At full inﬂation of the balloon, stretching of the lateral anterior
posts was seen (arrows) because the interpost distance between them was 20.8 mm.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Nandhakumar et al
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
did not conduct a bench test this time. However, from
these CT measurements, and on the basis of the
previous 2 bench tests, we concluded that a 29-mm
TAV balloon would lead to reversible stretching of
the posts.
PROSTHETIC VALVE INTERACTION TYPES
We propose a new classiﬁcation system for prosthetic
valve interactions. Two broad types of interactions
are possible: type M and type A. A BPMV or TMV
affected by a TAV system is proposed as a type M
interaction, and a TAV affected by a BPMV or TMV is
proposed as a type A interaction. Type M is further
subclassiﬁed
into
M1,
M2,
and
M3.
Reversible
stretching of the BPMV posts by the TAV balloon
projecting into the LVOT is type M1. Reversible
bending of the BPMV posts by the LVOT balloon is
type M2. Compression of the TMV stent frame by the
TAV balloon is type M3. Both type M1 and type M2 can
be seen during TAVR in the presence of a BPMV and
are benign. Type M3 can be seen in a scenario of BE
TAVR after the M-ViV procedure. Type M3 can affect
TMV function or lead to TMV embolization. If the TAV
is affected by the BPMV or TMV, it is a type A inter-
action. While performing TAVR in the presence of
BPMV, aortic embolization or paravalvular leak can
manifest from the interaction of the LVOT portion of
the TAV stent frame with the BPMV sewing ring.
While performing the DVR in vivo, the BPMV posts
were in a favorable lateral anterior position in cases 1
and 3. The BPMV post to IVS distance was less than
the TAV balloon diameter in these 2 cases. Hence the
TAV balloon expanded between the lateral anterior
FIGURE 4
Computed Tomography Predictors of Prosthetic Valve Interaction for Case 2
(A) Virtual basal ring to bioprosthetic mitral valve near post distance. (B) Virtual basal ring to bioprosthetic mitral valve sewing ring distance. (C) BPMV post
to interventricular septum distance. (D) Bioprosthetic mitral valve interpost distance. (E) Transthoracic echocardiogram shows the unfavorable central anterior post.
(F) Fluoroscopy image shows the unfavorable central anterior post projecting into the left ventricular outﬂow tract. The yellow arrows in panel A,C,E and F denote the
tip of the central anterior post of the Mosaic (Medtronic) mitral valve. A ¼ anterior; P ¼ posterior.
Nandhakumar et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
posts, and momentary stretching of the posts was
noted. We classify this as a type M1 interaction
(Figure 7). In case 2, the BPMV post was in an unfa-
vorable
central
anterior
position.
The
distance
between this post and the IVS was less than the TAV
balloon diameter; hence we noticed reversible bending
of this post by the LVOT part of the TAV balloon. We
classify this as a type M2 interaction (Figure 7). In both
types, M1 and M2, BPMV function did not worsen.
Bauernschmitt
et
al4
reported
a
simultaneous
transcatheter transapical DVR using SAPIEN 3 valves
(Edwards Lifesciences) in a 67-year-old woman with
degenerative AS and mitral regurgitation. First, a
29-mm SAPIEN 3 valve was deployed inside mitral
annular calcium, and then a 23-mm SAPIEN 3 valve
was placed in the aortic position. These investigators
did not document any valve interaction in their
report. However, 5 months later, the patient under-
went
open
heart
surgery
for
LVOT
obstruction
caused by migration of the TMV into the LVOT.
The explanted TMV was compressed on the LVOT
side. This is evidence of a type M3 interaction
(Figure 7).4
Amat-Santos et al3 studied the outcomes of TAVR
in preexisting prosthetic surgical mitral valves. These
investigators concluded that the TAV device was
embolized only in patients with a prosthetic mitral
valve to aortic annulus distance <7 mm. They also
observed deformation of the SE TAV prosthesis by the
BPMV sewing ring that led to signiﬁcant paravalvular
leaks.3 We classify this as a type A1 interaction
(Figure 7).
FIGURE 5
Bench Test for Case 2
A 23-mm transcatheter aortic valve balloon interacting with 27-mm Hancock II mitral valve (Medtronic) posts in an unfavorable position. (A) Fluoroscopy image of a
27-mm Hancock II valve with a radiopaque ring at the end of each post similar to the Mosaic (Medtronic) valve. (B) Bench model shows a sewn Hancock II valve at the
mitral position and a 23-mm Meril Navigator delivery balloon in the anterior left ventricular outﬂow tract. This model was created with the computed tomography
parameters given in Figure 4. The anterior post (yellow arrow) and the posterior posts (white arrows) are shown. (C) On full balloon inﬂation, we can see the bending
of the anterior post. (D) Schematic simulation of (C). Posterior posts are shown as dotted lines. (E) Simultaneous ﬂuoroscopy image of (B) before balloon inﬂation.
(F) Simultaneous ﬂuoroscopy image of (B) during balloon inﬂation shows bending of the anterior post. The yellow arrows in B, C, D, E, and F indicate the unfavourable
central anterior post projecting into the LVOT and that is compressed by the TAV balloon from the LVOT. The white arrows in B and C indicate the posterior posts of
BPMV.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Nandhakumar et al
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
FIGURE 6
Computed Tomography Predictors of Prosthetic Valve Interaction for Case 3
(A) Virtual basal ring to bioprosthetic mitral valve sewing ring distance. (B) Virtual basal ring to bioprosthetic mitral valve near post distance. (C) Favorable lateral
anterior posts of Perimount mitral valve (Edwards Lifesciences) on either side of the left ventricular outﬂow tract. (D) Bioprosthetic mitral valve post to interventricular
septum distance in long axis. (E) Bioprosthetic mitral valve posts to interventricular septum distances in cross-section. (F) Interpost distance. (G) Fluoroscopy image of
favorable lateral anterior posts on either side of the left ventricular outﬂow tract. (H) transthoracic echocardiogram image showing the favorable lateral anterior posts.
The double arrows in C, F, G, and H indicate the favourable lateral anterior posts of BPMV on either side of the LVOT.
FIGURE 7
Transcatheter Valve Interaction Classiﬁcation During Left-Sided Double Valve Replacement
aBased on anecdotal reports. BPMV ¼ bioprosthetic mitral valve; IVS ¼ interventricular septum; LV ¼ left ventricle; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract;
TAV ¼ transcatheter aortic valve; TMV ¼ transcatheter mitral valve; VBR ¼ virtual basal ring.
Nandhakumar et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
CLINICAL FOLLOW-UP
All patients underwent successful transcatheter DVR
and were alive at a mean follow-up of 20.67 
10.79 months. The ﬁrst patient was hospitalized for
atrial ﬁbrillation–induced heart failure at 31 months
and was in NYHA functional class II at the 33-month
follow-up. The other 2 patients were in NYHA func-
tional class I at their latest follow-up.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
This case series is small. Larger data with these novel
CT parameters and cutoffs for these distances should
be understood to predict the valve interactions. We
did not use a 3-dimensional printout model while
performing the bench tests. Bench tests of contem-
porary bioprosthetic valves, TAVs, and TMVs in a
patient-speciﬁc 3-dimensional printout model may
give a better understanding of these interactions.
CONCLUSIONS
A simultaneous transfemoral TAVR and a transseptal
M-ViV implantation can be safely performed in a
patient with a degenerated BPMV and native AS.
TAVR should be performed ﬁrst to avoid interaction
with
the
TMV
stent
frame.
Type
M1
and
type
M2 interactions are safe, whereas type M3 and type
A1 interactions are not.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Vasu
Nandhakumar, Department of Cardiology, Institute of
Cardio-Vascular Diseases, The Madras Medical Mission
Hospital,
4A,
Dr.
J.
Jayalalitha
Nagar,
Mogappir,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu 600037, India. E-mail: nandha.
intervention@gmail.com. X handle: @Nandha_Vasu.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Mack MJ, Leon MB, Smith CR, et al. 5-Year
outcomes of transcatheter aortic valve replace-
ment or surgical aortic valve replacement for high
surgical risk patients with aortic stenosis (PART-
NER 1): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2015;385:2477–2484.
2. Adams DH, Popma JJ, Reardon MJ, et al.
Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement with a
self-expanding
prosthesis.
N
Engl
J
Med.
2014;370:1790–1798.
3. Amat-Santos IJ, Cortés C, Nombela Franco L,
et al. Prosthetic mitral surgical valve in trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement recipients: a
multicenter
analysis.
JACC
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2017;10:1973–1981.
4. Bauernschmitt R, Bauer S, Liewald C, et al.
First
successful
transcatheter
double
valve
replacement from a transapical access and nine-
month
follow-up.
EuroIntervention.
2017;12:
1645–1648.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, complication,
computed tomography, double-valve
replacement, interaction, mitral valve, valve
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental ﬁgures, please
see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 8 , 2 0 2 5
Nandhakumar et al
A P R I L 1 6 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 3 7 0
Transcatheter DVR planning: Step-by-Step
9
