
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
HOW WE DID IT
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial
Infarction Caused by Embolized
Transcatheter Aortic Valve in
Ascending Aorta
Zvonimir Ostojic, MD, PHD,a Hrvoje Jurin, MD,a Josko Bulum, MD, PHDa,b
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVE Embolized valves during transcatheter aortic valve replacement can cause myocardial ischemia by
obstructing diastolic retrograde blood ﬂow.
KEY STEPS To prove the described mechanism of ischemia, we performed aortography with catheter above the
embolized valve and placed a stiff wire through the embolized valve, causing leaﬂet opening while monitoring elec-
trocardiogram. As a treatment method, an aortic stent was implanted from the embolized valve into the aortic arch,
enabling backﬂow and resolving the ischemia.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS Overlooking the described cause of ischemia is the biggest pitfall because it can be diagnosed
and treated using simple techniques.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Embolized transcatheter aortic valve replacement valve can cause myocardial ischemia by
blocking the diastolic backﬂow of blood. Aortography and opening of the embolized valve leaﬂets with wire can be used
for diagnosis, and aortic stent implantation in the embolized valve can be used as a treatment modality. (JACC Case Rep.
2025;30:103125) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
E
mbolized
transcatheter
aortic
valves
can
cause myocardial ischemia through various
mechanisms, including direct obstruction of
coronary
arteries
and
interference
with
diastolic
ﬂow from the aorta.1 Later mechanism is extremely
rare, and to the best of our knowledge, it has only
been described once. In that case, a patient with a
large annulus and normal size of the aorta devel-
oped ischemia hours after the procedure and was
diagnosed using pressure tracings.1
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Embolized TAVR valve in the ascending aorta
can cause global myocardial ischemia by
blocking the diastolic backﬂow of blood in
coronary arteries.
 Aortography
with
a
catheter
above
the
embolized valve and opening of the embol-
ized valve leaﬂets with stiff wire can be used
for diagnosis, and aortic stent implantation
in the embolized valve can be used as a
treatment modality.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103125
From the aDepartment of Cardiovascular Diseases, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia; and the bSchool of Medi-
cine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received October 17, 2024; revised manuscript received November 7, 2024, accepted November 19, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
CASE SUMMARY
An 83-year-old female patient with symp-
tomatic severe aortic stenosis and preserved
left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction was
referred
for
transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement (TAVR). The patient initially
presented with cardiogenic shock due to critical
aortic
stenosis
(maximal
pressure
gradient
110 mm Hg, aortic valve area 0.3 cm2), for which
balloon aortic valvuloplasty with 20-mm balloon was
performed.
Computed
tomography
measurements
are
pre-
sented in Figure 1. Brieﬂy, the annulus perimeter was
70.8 mm, coronary heights were >12 mm, and the
ascending aorta diameter was 26.3  27.5 mm. A
contrast-ﬁlled
structure
of
unknown
origin
was
observed in the sinus of Valsalva of the noncoronary
cusp (Figure 2).
TAVR was performed using a self-expanding valve
Evolut PROþ 26 (Medtronic). However, the valve
embolized in the aorta, causing ST-segment denive-
lation followed by bradycardia and asystole (Figure 3).
We
began
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation,
on
which asystole converted into sustained, pulseless
ventricular
tachycardia
unresponsive
to
car-
dioversions. The patient was intubated. During the
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation,
dilatation
of
the
native valve was performed with a 22  40 mm Z-MED
balloon (B Braun) (Video 1). The embolized valve was
snared using One Snare 35 mm (Merit Medical) and
pulled in the ascending aorta (Video 2). The second
valve of the same type and size has been implanted
after which successful cardioversion and hemody-
namic
stabilization
was
achieved.
Aortography
revealed the adequate position of the second valve
with mild paravalvular regurgitation and patent cor-
onary arteries (Figure 4, Video 3).
However, an ST-segment elevation developed on
retrieval of the pigtail catheter in descending aorta
(Figure 5).
The hypothesized mechanism of the ischemia was
blockage of diastolic ﬂow from the aorta by the
embolized valve, causing inadequate perfusion of
coronary arteries. This was conﬁrmed with aortog-
raphy and opening of the embolized valve leaﬂets
FIGURE 1
CT Measurements Obtained Prior to TAVR
Computed tomography (CT) measurements obtained prior to transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) used for valve sizing. Note larger diameters of aorta
compared to annulus. LC ¼ left coronary; LCC ¼ left coronary cusp; NC ¼ noncoronary; NCC ¼ noncoronary cusp; RC ¼ right coronary; RCC ¼ right coronary cusp;
SOV ¼ sinus of Valsalva.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
ECG = electrocardiogram
LV = left ventricle
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Ostojic et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Global Myocardial Ischemia After Embolized TAVR Valve
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 5
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
with Lunderquist wire (Cook Medical) (Figure 6,
Video 4).
An E-XL aortic stent (Jotec) 130  32 mm was
implanted from the embolized valve into the aortic
arch (Figure 7, Video 5).
Final aortography conﬁrmed adequate expansion
of the stent, proper backﬂow of the blood, and patent
aortic arch branches without signs of ischemia in
electrocardiogram (ECG) (Figure 8, Video 6).
The patient completely recovered and was dis-
charged on the ninth day. She has not had any car-
diovascular events during the 15 months of follow-up.
PROCEDURAL STEPS
Following ultrasound vascular access acquisition,
standardized techniques were used to position a Sa-
fari Small wire (Boston Scientiﬁc) in the LV. The
initial valve was deployed after 1 recapture and
embolized immediately on release. The precise cause
of
embolization
has
not
been
established.
The
deployment was complicated due to the tortuosity of
the aorta and challenging assessment of implantation
depth due to the structure in the noncoronary cusp.
After the embolization, native valve dilatation was
FIGURE 2
CT Representation of a Contrast-Filled Structure in the SOV of NCC
A contrast-ﬁlled structure was noted in the SOV of NCC in the CT. Etiology of the ﬁnding is unknown and it could be related to prior balloon aortic valve angioplasty.
Abbreviations as in Figure 1.
FIGURE 3
Position of the Embolized Valve in the AO and ECG Changes Following Embolization
Position of the embolized valve in the aorta (AO) in relation to the aortic annulus marked with yellow line. Immediately after embolization a ST-segment denivelation
and bradycardia were noted in electrocardiogram (ECG) strip, which were followed by asystole.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Ostojic et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 5
Global Myocardial Ischemia After Embolized TAVR Valve
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
performed
with
a
22

40
mm
Z-MED
balloon
(B Braun) (Video 1). The second valve was passed
through the embolized and positioned in the native
annulus. The pigtail catheter in the aortic arch was
replaced by Snare One 35 mm (Merit Medical), and the
embolized valve was pulled into the ascending aorta
while holding the second valve in place (Video 2).
Snare was exchanged with pigtail catheter, which was
positioned through the embolized valve in non-
coronary cups to facilitate second valve deployment,
which was successfully performed. A Safari wire was
removed from LV over another pigtail catheter. Con-
trol
aortography
revealed
adequate
position
and
function of the second valve (Video 3). The pigtail was
placed within the frame of the second valve and
through the embolized valve. Therefore, it kept the
embolized valve leaﬂets open. However, on retrieval
of the pigtail, an ST-segment elevation was noted.
Repeated aortography conﬁrmed no retrograde
ﬂow below the embolized valve, the hypothesized
mechanism causing ischemia (Figure 6A, Video 4).
During the aortography, a 6-F pigtail catheter was
placed
on
the
embolized
valve’s
upper
border,
ensuring it was not interfering with leaﬂets. As a
FIGURE 4
Angiographic Result After the Second Valve
Implantation
Angiographic result after the second valve implantation with
evidence of mild paravalvular leak and patent coronary
arteries.
FIGURE 5
ST-Segment Elevation Noted After Catheter Removal From Embolized Valve
Electrocardiogram strip demonstrating ST-segment elevation noted after catheter removal from embolized valve.
Ostojic et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Global Myocardial Ischemia After Embolized TAVR Valve
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 5
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
second conﬁrmation, a stiff wire (Lunderquist) was
passed through the embolized valve (but not through
the second valve), causing leaﬂet opening, after
which the ST-segment normalized (Figure 6B). A
pigtail catheter was used to pass the wire through the
leaﬂets and not through the valve struts.
Lastly, an E-XL aortic stent 130  32 mm was
implanted from the embolized valve into the aortic
arch, enabling backﬂow (Figures 7 and 8, Videos 5
and 6). Implantation was performed over the Lun-
derquist wire previously placed in LV for better sup-
port. Stent was slowly and precisely released from the
bottom
of
the
embolized
valve
while
properly
covering the embolized valve leaﬂets and not inter-
fering with the second (functional) valve (Video 5).
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
When
embolization
occurs,
an
embolized
valve
should be pulled in the ascending aorta, especially
when a coronary obstruction is a concern. If the
embolized valve is Evolut, the easiest way to pull it is
to snare it at 1 or both C-tab paddles. Secondary TAVR
access can be used for snaring, as described in this
case. We advise against removing the implantation
wire from the LV because it might be challenging to
get back in it before the second valve implantation.
The embolized valve should not be pulled forcefully
to avoid the risk of injury to the aortic wall or aortic
branches.
Not recognizing that an embolized valve can cause
myocardial ischemia by blocking the aortic diastolic
blood ﬂow represents the biggest pitfall presented in
this case, because most operators are unfamiliar with
FIGURE 6
Aortography and ECG After Placement of Wire Through the Embolized Valve
(A) Aortography reveals fully functional embolized valve in ascending aorta disabling retrograde ﬂow in coronary arteries causing global myocardial ischemia. Red lines
represent the position of the leaﬂets of the embolized valve. (B) ECG strip after placement of stiff wire through the embolized valve. ST-segment normalization
occurred (as compared to Figure 5). Abbreviation as in Figure 3.
FIGURE 7
Deployment of the Aortic Stent
Deployment of the aortic stent in the embolized valve. Red
arrows indicate point of contact of the stent and frame of
embolized valve. The position of the stent is such to fully cover
leaﬂets of the embolized valve and not to interfere with
functional valve.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Ostojic et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 5
Global Myocardial Ischemia After Embolized TAVR Valve
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
it due to its rarity. Indeed, observed complication has
only been described once, despite relatively common
valve embolizations in the same position, such as in
presented case, however, primarily with older valve
designs.
Contemporary
valves,
including
Evolut
PROþ used in this case, have an outer skirt that was
developed to reduce paravalvular leak. The embol-
ized valve in the described case was completely
expanded, with a radius of 26 mm in the inﬂow (outer
skirt) part that is almost the same as the size of the
aorta
(Figure
9).
Therefore,
it
sealed
the
aorta,
disabling
sufﬁcient
backﬂow
of
the
blood
with
FIGURE 8
Final Aortography and ECG
The ﬁnal aortography revealing complete expansion of the stent, proper backﬂow of the blood, and patent aortic arch branches. On stent implantation, there were no
ischemic changes noted in the ECG. Abbreviation as in Figure 3.
FIGURE 9
Aorta Diameter at the Inﬂow Part of the Embolized Valve
Aorta diameter measured on aortography at the level of inﬂow (outer skirt) part of embolized valve from 2 projections: (A) right anterior
oblique (RAO) and caudal (CAUD) and (B) left anterior oblique (LAO) and cranial (CRAN). White lines represent the position of measured aorta
diameter which equals diameter of the valve (26 mm). Based on the measurements, almost complete sealing of the aorta is evident, without
sufﬁcient retrograde blood ﬂow to maintain coronary arteries perfusion.
Ostojic et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Global Myocardial Ischemia After Embolized TAVR Valve
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 5
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
consequent development of ischemia. Figure 9 shows
aorta diameter at the inﬂow part of the embolized
valve.
A classic aortography should be performed to
conﬁrm a diagnosis while considering that the pigtail
should be above the leaﬂets and not interacting with
them. Meticulous cine inspection should follow to
make sure whether there is retrograde contrast pass-
ing through or around the embolized valve.
As a second test, we advise opening the leaﬂets of
the embolized valve while observing changes in the
ECG. This should be performed using a stiff wire with
enough force to keep the leaﬂets open. We recom-
mend using the Lunderquist wire because it is stiff
enough, has a relatively atraumatic tip, and can be
used as a working wire for stent implantation. When
passing the wire through the valve, we advise using a
pigtail catheter to ensure the wire does not get
tangled within the valve frame. Lastly, the wire
should be placed just under the embolized valve,
making sure there is no interaction with the properly
implanted valve.
If the ischemia mechanism is conﬁrmed, we advise
implanting the aortic stent within the embolized
valve to keep the leaﬂets open. The stent can be
implanted
over
the
Lunderquist
wire.
However,
before implantation of the stent, the wire should be
positioned in LV over the pigtail catheter for better
support. While deploying the self-expandable aortic
stent, caution should be made not to interfere with
the second functional valve but to cover the leaﬂets
of
the
embolized
valve.
Therefore,
initial
stent
release should be slow, with the target contact with
the distal part of the embolized valve (Figure 7). If
that is not possible due to its relation with functional
valve, a higher implantation of the stent might be
possible.
However,
one
should
be
aware
of
the
anatomical characteristics of the embolized valve.
More precisely, the operator should know at which
height from the bottom leaﬂets are sutured to un-
derstand at which height the stent can be implanted.
In the case of the Evolut platform, which is 13 mm, it
provides some space to implant the aortic stent
higher in the embolized valve.
CONCLUSIONS
Embolized TAVR valve in the ascending aorta can
cause global myocardial ischemia by blocking the
diastolic backﬂow of blood in coronary arteries. This
extremely rare complication should be considered in
cases with evident ischemia without an apparent
cause. Furthermore, it can occur when the ascending
aorta diameter is wider than the aortic annulus.
Aortography with a catheter above the embolized
valve and opening of the embolized valve leaﬂets
with stiff wire can be used for diagnosis, and aortic
stent implantation in the embolized valve can be used
as a treatment modality.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Bulum has served as proctor for Medtronic, Edwards Lifesciences,
and Boston Scientiﬁc. All other authors have reported that they have
no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
CORRESPONDENCE
TO:
Dr
Zvonimir
Ostojic,
Division
of
Interventional
Cardiology,
Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, University
Hospital Center Zagreb, Kispaticeva 12, 10000 Zagreb,
Croatia. E-mail: ostojiczvonimir@gmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E
1. Toggweiler S, Mury R, Wolfrum M, Moccetti F.
Global ischemia after complicated transcatheter
aortic valve replacement. JACC Cardiovasc Interv.
2022;15(11):1181–1182.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcin.2022.02.030
KEY WORDS aortic valve, complication,
myocardial ischemia, stenosis, valve
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 3 , 2 0 2 5
Ostojic et al
F E B R U A R Y 5 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 1 2 5
Global Myocardial Ischemia After Embolized TAVR Valve
7
