
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Balloon-Expandable Transcatheter Heart
Valve Dislocation Into the Left Ventricle
Successfully Repositioned by an
“Anchoring Balloon”
Mauro Pennacchi, MD, PHD,a Melwyn Luis Muthukkattil, MD,b Marco S. Nazzaro, MD,a Davide Cristofani, MD,c
Francesco De Felice, MDa
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Transcatheter aortic valve implantation is a well-established treatment option in older patients with
symptomatic severe aortic stenosis. Balloon-expandable valve migration is a rare but potentially life-threatening
complication.
CASE SUMMARY We report a case of an 87-year-old man with severe aortic stenosis who underwent transfemoral
Edwards Sapien 3 valve implantation complicated by delivery-balloon rupture. During deployment, we observed a
pressure drop, resulting in incomplete valve expansion. Acute prosthesis migration into the left ventricle occurred.
The prosthesis was crossed with a 28-mm VACS-II balloon (OSYPKA) and successfully repositioned by withdrawing the
“anchoring balloon.” Angiography showed a well-expanded, well-positioned valve without paravalvular leaks.
The patient was discharged 2 days later.
DISCUSSION To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case ever reported of successful percutaneous recapturing of a balloon
transcatheter heart valve dislocated into the left ventricle during transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Percutaneous recapturing of dislocated balloon-expandable valve into the left ventricle is
feasible and may be a valid bailout strategy. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103907) © 2025 The Authors. Published
by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under
the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 87-year-old patient was evaluated for mild exer-
tional dyspnea (NYHA functional class III) during a
scheduled visit at our outpatient clinic in December
2024.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE
 Recapturing
and
repositioning
a
balloon-
expandable transcatheter heart valve dis-
located into the left ventricle is feasible and
may represent a therapeutic strategy for this
rare complication.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103907
From the aDepartment of Cardiology, Interventional Cardiology Unit, San Camillo Hospital, Rome, Italy; bDepartment of Car-
diovascular Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Sant’Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy; and the cDepartment of Cardiology,
Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Unit, San Camillo Hospital, Rome, Italy.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received February 10, 2025; revised manuscript received March 6, 2025, accepted March 7, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
His personal medical history included arterial
hypertension,
dyslipidemia,
and
chronic
coronary syndrome with previous percuta-
neous coronary angioplasty and stenting on
the right coronary artery and left circumﬂex
artery.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis in this case is heteroge-
neous, as it includes chronic coronary syndrome
progression; valvular defects such as moderate to
severe mitral regurgitation and severe aortic stenosis;
endocarditis; and muscular damage as in the case of
myocarditis.
INVESTIGATIONS
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal left
ventricular dimensions and function with an ejection
fraction of 55% as well as a heavily calciﬁed tricuspid
aortic valve causing severe aortic stenosis (aortic
valve area: 0.8 cm2; peak velocity: 4.24 m/s; median
pressure gradient: 44 mm Hg; Doppler Velocity Index
(DVI): 0.20) and moderate aortic regurgitation (vena
contracta: 4 mm; pressure half-time: 440 ms).
Preprocedural
computed
tomography
showed
mildly calciﬁed aortic valve leaﬂets with an annulus
area of 609 mm2 and an annulus diameter of 26 
30 mm, as well as adequate coronary artery heights
and iliac-femoral vascular accesses (Figures 1 to 3).
Heart team evaluation favored transcatheter aortic
valve implantation (TAVI) of an Edwards Sapien 3
(29 mm) bioprosthesis via transfemoral approach.
MANAGEMENT
We used a 14-F right femoral artery and a 6-F left
radial artery as the primary and secondary accesses,
respectively. During rapid left ventricular pacing over
the wire, suboptimal delivery balloon expansion was
observed (Video 1). Initially, we suspected a possible
indeﬂator-related
issue,
but
a
further
dilation
attempt was unsuccessful. We opted for manual
dilation through a syringe containing 50 mL of non-
diluted iodine contrast medium, which nonetheless
led to suboptimal prosthesis dilation (Video 2). After
balloon deﬂation and withdrawal, acute bioprosthesis
migration into the left ventricle occurred, with the
stiff wire remaining positioned in the apex (Video 3).
We subsequently attempted to recapture the bio-
prosthesis with a 28-mm NuCLEUS balloon (NuMED)
at low atmospheric pressures to prevent complete
valvular expansion in the left ventricle. After we
anchored the Sapien 3 valve and attempted to repo-
sition it in the distal annulus, additional pulling ma-
neuvers caused slipping of the balloon into the
ascending aorta and prosthesis dislocation yet again,
without any loss of pacing over the wire. Fortunately,
the stiff wire remained ﬁxed inside the prosthesis.
While advancing the stiff wire into the left ventricular
apex, the prosthesis migrated once again (Video 4).
We successfully performed a second retrieval attempt
with a 28-mm VACS II balloon during rapid controlled
pacing at 140 beats/min, again inﬂating at low atmo-
spheric pressures, with the aim of temporarily placing
the Sapien 3 valve in the annulus. Once correct
positioning was conﬁrmed by the pigtail catheter
situated in the noncoronary sinus, rapid pacing at 180
beats/min was carried out and the OSYPKA VACS II
balloon was fully inﬂated (Video 5). After reposi-
tioning the balloon at the center of the prosthesis, we
proceeded
with
reinﬂation
to
optimize
valvular
expansion (Video 6). Final angiography showed good
positioning, with no paravalvular leaks and no peri-
cardial effusion (Video 7). After the procedure, we
inspected the delivery balloon and observed contrast
leakage from 2 holes at the point where the prosthesis
was crimped (Video 8). Hemodynamic parameters
were stable and the postprocedural hospital stay was
uneventful, with the patient being discharged 2 days
later.
FOLLOW-UP
At 1-month follow-up, the patient reported improve-
ment in dyspnea and the echocardiogram conﬁrmed
good Sapien 3 valve positioning without paravalvular
leaks
and
with
a
mean
pressure
gradient
of
5.4 mm Hg.
DISCUSSION
Transcatheter aortic valve bioprosthesis dislocation is
a rare, possibly life-threatening complication associ-
ated with high mortality, with it being the most
common cause for emergent cardiac surgery.1
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case reporting
successful percutaneous recapturing of a balloon
transcatheter heart valve dislocated into the left
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To understand the mechanisms of severe
balloon THV underexpansion during
implantation.
 To understand bailout techniques for recap-
turing a BEV dislocated into the LV.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
LVOT = left ventricular outﬂow
tract
TAVI = transcatheter aortic
valve implantation
Pennacchi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Bailout Repositioning of a Sapien3 Valve Dislocated Into the LV
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 0 7
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
ventricle during transfemoral TAVI. A previous case
report outlined an unsuccessful attempt at retrieving
a Sapien XT valve through a valvuloplasty balloon
despite
extensive
pulling
maneuvers,
which
therefore required a snare technique to reposition the
valve.
Despite
repositioning
in
the
annulus,
its
rotated position determined the moderate to severe
paravalvular leak, requiring additional Sapien XT
FIGURE 1
Annular, LVOT, and SOV Measurements on Preoperative CT
(A to C) Index CTA images with annular, LVOT, and SOV measurements. (D) CT images of working projections. CT ¼ computed tomography; CTA ¼ computed to-
mography angiography; LAO ¼ left anterior oblique; LCC ¼ left coronary cusp; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; NCC ¼ noncoronary cusp; RCC ¼ right coronary
cusp; SOV ¼ sinus of Valsalva.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Pennacchi et al
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 0 7
Bailout Repositioning of a Sapien3 Valve Dislocated Into the LV
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
valve implantation distally.2 Another case reported
Sapien XT valve dislocation into the left ventricular
outﬂow tract (LVOT), requiring urgent deployment of
a second Sapien XT valve at a higher position; the
operator used the delivery system balloon tip to
engage the dislocated valve and carefully pull into
back into the LVOT, ensuring it was in a stable
coaxial position relative to the second implanted
prosthesis.3 A further case report has described the
use of a valvuloplasty balloon to recapture a balloon-
expandable valve dislocated into the left ventricle,
but the procedure was performed through a trans-
apical approach and the resulting poor prosthetic
position
called
for
second
valve
implantation.4
FIGURE 2
Coronary Heights and Sinotubular Junction Measurements on Preoperative CT
(A and B) LCA and RCA heights from the basal plane. (C) Virtual rendering with an Edwards Sapien 3 bioprosthesis in the proper position. (D) Sinotubular junction
measurements. CT ¼ computed tomography; LC ¼ left coronary cusp; LCA ¼ left coronary artery; NC ¼ noncoronary cusp; RC ¼ right coronary cusp; RCA ¼ right
coronary artery.
Pennacchi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Bailout Repositioning of a Sapien3 Valve Dislocated Into the LV
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 0 7
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
Existing literature reports regarding self-expanding
valve
dislocation
into
the
left
ventricle
have
described the use of the “double snare” technique to
retrieve and subsequently reposition the valve in the
aortic position.5
In our case, dislocation into the left ventricle
stemmed from delivery system failure and rupture.
In our opinion, there could be 2 possible reasons for
this failure: either due to a manufacturing defect or
due to accidental damage to the balloon during
crimping of the prosthesis. The ﬁrst essential aspect
in
preventing
hemodynamic
instability
was
the
constant presence of the stiff wire inside the pros-
thesis, which allowed sufﬁcient alignment with the
LVOT and prevented malrotation, a condition that
can be fatal. The second aspect is the choice of the
balloon
for
anchoring
and
retrieving
the
valve.
Despite initially using the NuMED NuCLEUS balloon,
which appeared more suitable due to its dog-bone
shape, the OSYPKA VACS II balloon was able to
both anchor and correctly retrieve the valve because
of the lower proﬁle of the balloon. Furthermore,
valve
underexpansion
allowed
less
encumbrance
during the retrieval phase and positioning. Stable
pigtail catheter positioning in the noncoronary sinus
also proved key, as it provided a useful marker for
correct
implantation.
Lastly,
in
our
opinion,
controlled pacing over the wire appears to have been
paramount in recapturing the valve, modulating it at
120/140 beats/min during the retrieving phase to
reduce ventricular contraction boost.
CONCLUSIONS
To our knowledge, this case is the ﬁrst report of
successful recapturing and repositioning of a balloon-
expandable transcatheter aortic valve dislocated into
the left ventricle during transfemoral TAVI.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Mauro Pennacchi,
Department of Cardiology, Interventional Cardiology
Unit,
San
Camillo
Hospital,
Circ.ne
Gianicolense
87, 00152 Rome, Italy. E-mail: pennacchi.mauro@
gmail.com. X handle: @mauro_pennacchi.
FIGURE 3
Peripheral Accesses on Preoperative CT
Three-dimensional reconstruction of the left and right iliac and femoral arteries, with short-axis measurements. CT ¼ computed tomography;
RAO ¼ right anterior oblique.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Pennacchi et al
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 0 7
Bailout Repositioning of a Sapien3 Valve Dislocated Into the LV
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Eggebrecht
H,
Schmermund
A,
Kahlert
P,
Erbel R, Voigtländer T, Mehta RH. Emergent car-
diac surgery during transcatheter aortic valve im-
plantation (TAVI): a weighted meta-analysis of 9,
251 patients from 46 studies. EuroIntervention.
2013;8(9):1072–1080.
2. Dumonteil
N,
Marcheix
B,
Grunenwald
E,
Roncalli J, Massabuau P, Carrié D. Left ventricular
embolization of an aortic balloon-expandable bio-
prosthesis: balloon capture and reimpaction as an
alternative to emergent conversion to open-heart
surgery. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;6(3):308–310.
3. Nicolino A, Vischi M, Moshiri S, et al. Valve
migration into the left ventricular outﬂow tract
managed by coaxial double-valve alignment. JACC
Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;7(7):822–824.
4. Tiroch K, Schleiting H, Karpettas N, et al. How
should I treat dislocation of a TAVI SAPIEN pros-
thesis into the left ventricle? EuroIntervention.
2015;10(11):1370–1372.
5. Bunc
M,
Vitez
L,
Terseglav
S,
Zlahtic
T,
Ussia GP. Transcatheter aortic valve dislocation in
left
ventricular outﬂow tract
with successful
repositioning using “double snare” technique. Int J
Clin Med. 2021;12(1):7–13.
KEY WORDS balloon-expandable valve,
complication, transcatheter aortic valve
implantation (TAVI), transcatheter
repositioning, transfemoral
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
Pennacchi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Bailout Repositioning of a Sapien3 Valve Dislocated Into the LV
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 9 0 7
6
