
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE: EUROPCR
Left Ventricular Outﬂow Obstruction
After Transcatheter Heart Valve Migration
and Stent Infolding
Sarah Verhemel, MD, Antoon J.M. van den Enden, MD, Joost Daemen, MD, PHD, Nicolas M. Van Mieghem, MD, PHD
ABSTRACT
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation is a guideline-recommended treatment for elderly patients with
symptomatic severe aortic valve stenosis. Procedural safety is high, yet accidental valve malpositioning can occur.
We report on a migrated transcatheter heart valve that convoluted on release from its delivery catheter. (Level of
Difﬁculty: Intermediate.) (J Am Coll Cardiol Case Rep 2023;16:101893) © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier
on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 86-year-old man experiencing progressive dys-
pnea (NYHA functional class IV), angina (Canadian
Cardiovascular
Society
score
for
angina
3),
and
syncope secondary to critical aortic stenosis was
referred as an outpatient to our center for consid-
eration of transcatheter aortic valve replacement
(TAVR).
He
was
at
high
operative
risk
with
an
STS-PROM (Society of Thoracic Surgeons–Predicted
Risk of Operative Mortality) score of 8.16%.
PAST MEDICAL CARDIAC HISTORY
His
cardiac
history
included
a
<70%
stenotic
lesion in the left anterior descending artery and a
recent
pacemaker
insertion
for
complete
heart
block.
INVESTIGATIONS
The preprocedural transthoracic echocardiography
showed a nondilated left ventricle (LV) with pre-
served systolic function and critical aortic valve ste-
nosis (Vmax 5.44 m/s, mean gradient 77 mm Hg)
(Figure 1). Computed tomography revealed an Agat-
ston score of 6,131 HU, annulus area of 545 mm3,
signiﬁcant calciﬁcation of left ventricular outﬂow
tract (LVOT) with membranous septum length of
3.6 mm (Figure 2).
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To understand the mechanism of stent frame
infolding on THV release.
 To understand bail-out techniques of stent
frame infolding.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2023.101893
From the Department of Cardiology, Thoraxcenter, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received April 7, 2023; revised manuscript received April 24, 2023, accepted May 1, 2023.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 1 6 , 2 0 2 3
ª 2 0 2 3 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
MANAGEMENT
The procedure was performed under local
anesthesia, with ﬁlter-based cerebral embolic
protection. A single access site was chosen
using a 14-F sheath in the right common
femoral artery and a 6-F sheath for a pigtail in
the ipsilateral superﬁcial femoral artery. Af-
ter balloon dilatation with a 22-mm balloon,
an ACURATE neo2 (Boston Scientiﬁc) large
transcatheter heart valve (THV) (hereafter THV 1) was
deployed over a preshaped wire.
During
deployment, the
self-expanding
THV
1
migrated toward the LVOT. On complete deployment,
the delivery system could not be detached from the
valve frame. A sequence of maneuvers including
push-pull manipulation of the SAFARI2 wire (Boston
Scientiﬁc) and gentle rotation and pull on the delivery
catheter eventually resulted in a brisk release of the
delivery catheter and wire into the aortic arch. This
coincided with an invagination of the valve frame
that now partially obstructed the LVOT (Video 1,
Figure 3C). The patient became hemodynamically
unstable and required intermittent vasopressor sup-
port. The infolded frame was successfully recrossed
with a 0.035-inch straight wire, conﬁrmed ﬂuoro-
scopically, which was then exchanged for a pre-
shaped wire. The frame could be re-expanded with a
22-mm balloon and remained stable in the LVOT
with its stabilizing arches protruding across the aortic
valve into the sinuses of Valsalva (Figure 4). A 26-mm
SAPIEN 3 Ultra (Edwards) THV (hereafter THV 2) was
then deployed at the level of the native annulus
locking the migrated THV 1 in place. The residual
mean gradient across the aortic valve was 10 mm Hg
with
no
aortic
regurgitation
(Figure
5).
Multiple
calciﬁc debris particles were collected in the cerebral
protection ﬁlters (Figure 6). Large bore arteriotomy
closure was achieved with an 18-F system.
FOLLOW-UP
Transthoracic echocardiography conﬁrmed an overall
good bioprosthetic valve performance predischarge
on day 3 (Figure 7). Furthermore, echocardiography
showed trace mitral regurgitation, which indicates
FIGURE 1
Continuous Doppler on Native Aortic Valve
Continuous Doppler shows an aortic valve max of 5.44 m/s.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
LV = left ventricle
LVOT = left ventricular outﬂow
tract
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
Verhemel et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 6 , 2 0 2 3
LVO Obstruction After THV Migration and Stent Infolding
J U N E 2 1 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 8 9 3
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
there was no iatrogenic injury to the mitral valve
apparatus.
Multidetector
computed
tomography
images
conﬁrmed the deep positioning of THV 1 in the LVOT
and the properly positioned THV 2 leaﬂets at the
aortic annular level without coronary impediment
(Figure 8).
At the 30-day outpatient clinic visit, the patient
mentioned marked improvement of his symptoms
with
increased
exercise
tolerance
and
improved
quality of life.
DISCUSSION
TAVR has matured into a safe treatment for elderly
patients with symptomatic severe aortic valve ste-
nosis.1 Transcatheter valve migration is a rare event
and may require revalving or surgery.2,3 Inappro-
priate sizing, lack of calcium, ventricular ectopy,
extreme aorta take-off, or inability to visualize the
landing zone may predispose to transcatheter migra-
tion or embolization. A recent cohort study identiﬁed
too low positioning as the main reason for revalving.3
In our case, THV 1 migrated during deployment,
which interrupted the forward pressure that is typi-
cally recommended during deployment. Because of
inadequate forward pressure on the delivery catheter
during deployment, the radio-opaque marker on the
delivery system did not propel into the LV as it
usually should do on ﬁnal THV release. In fact, this
radio-opaque marker moved upward (rather than
downward toward the LV), indicating that the capsule
was moving toward the ascending aorta (and not into
the LV), subsequently wrapping itself around a distal
pillar of the frame. The deeply implanted THV did not
interact with the mitral valve apparatus. In the matter
of mitral valve interference, cardiac surgery would be
contingent on clinical picture and operation risk.
FIGURE 2
Multidetector Computed Tomography Images of the Native Aortic Valve
(A) Measurement of aortic annulus for cross-sectional area and perimeter in end systole. (B) Three-cusp coplanar view. (C) Stretched vessel
image, infra-annular membranous septum length 3.6 mm. (D) 3-dimensional reconstructions of valve.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 6 , 2 0 2 3
Verhemel et al
J U N E 2 1 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 8 9 3
LVO Obstruction After THV Migration and Stent Infolding
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
FIGURE 3
Aortograms of THV 1 Deployment
(A) ACURATE neo2 large transcatheter heart valve (THV 1) valve shown not deployed. (B) Complete deployment of valve. (C and D) Deformed
valve on retraction of delivery system.
FIGURE 4
Aortogram of Wire Crossing and Re-expansion
(Left) Wire crossing the deformed valve and (right) re-expansion of valve after balloon dilatation.
Verhemel et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 6 , 2 0 2 3
LVO Obstruction After THV Migration and Stent Infolding
J U N E 2 1 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 8 9 3
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
A benchtop simulation of this event is demon-
strated in Video 2. By subsequent pulling on the de-
livery catheter, the nitinol frame convoluted but
could be easily redeployed to its spherical format by
balloon valvuloplasty. Maintaining forward motion
on the delivery catheter during the entire deployment
process may have prevented this release malfunc-
tioning. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report of
such phenomenon in vivo. Techniques to consider in
this situation are: 1) to attempt to pass a wire through
the transcatheter valve as it remains connected to the
delivery catheter and perform an undersized valvu-
loplasty to help it disengage from the delivery cath-
eter;
and
2)
ensuring
knob
2
is
fully
opened,
application of careful forward push with centraliza-
tion of nose cone by gentle pull on SAFARI2 wire, and
ensuring closure of knob 1 to deﬂect inner catheter
and lift the stent holder off the valve, weighing the
risk of further device migration into the LV.
CONCLUSIONS
Transcatheter valve migration and frame infolding is
a rare life-threatening complication of TAVR that can
be solved by rewiring and revalving.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr van den Enden has received personal fees from Abiomed and
speaker fees from AngioDynamics. Dr Daemen has received institu-
tional grant/research support from AstraZeneca, Abbott Vascular,
Boston Scientiﬁc, ACIST Medical, Medtronic, Microport, Pie Medical,
and ReCor Medical; and consulting and speaker fees from Abbott
Vascular, Abiomed, ACIST Medical, Boston Scientiﬁc, Cardialysis BV,
CardiacBooster, Kaminari Medical, ReCor Medical, PulseCath BV, Pie
Medical, Sanoﬁ, Siemens Health Care, and Medtronic. Dr Van Mie-
ghem has received grant funding from or has contracts with Abbott,
Boston Scientiﬁc, Biotronik, Edwards Lifesciences, Medtronic, Pul-
seCath BV, Abiomed, and Daiichi Sankyo; consulting fees from
FIGURE 5
Aortogram of Deployment and Expansion of THV 2
(Left) The 26-mm SAPIEN 3 Ultra THV (THV 2) not deployed and (right) fully expanded THV 2 in THV 1. Abbreviation as in Figure 3.
FIGURE 6
Cerebral Embolic Protection
Cerebral embolic protection shown after procedural removal.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 6 , 2 0 2 3
Verhemel et al
J U N E 2 1 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 8 9 3
LVO Obstruction After THV Migration and Stent Infolding
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FIGURE 7
Postprocedural TTE Measurements
Postprocedural transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) measurements using continuous Doppler on bioprosthetic aortic valve. Continuous
Doppler shows an aortic valve max of 2.22 m/s.
FIGURE 8
Multidetector Computed Tomography Images Post TAVR of the Bioprosthetic Valves
(1) Stretched left ventricular outﬂow tract vessel images of (A) THV 1 and (B) THV 2 (2) Distance of THV 1 to left coronary ostia is 4.5 mm. (3)
Distance of THV 1 to right coronary ostia is 4.8 mm. TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement; other abbreviations as in Figures 3 and 5.
Verhemel et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 6 , 2 0 2 3
LVO Obstruction After THV Migration and Stent Infolding
J U N E 2 1 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 8 9 3
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
JenaValve, Daiichi Sankyo, Abbott, Boston Scientiﬁc, and Medtronic;
payments or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speaking, manu-
scripts, and educational events from Abiomed and Amgen; and sup-
port for attending meetings and or travel from JenaValve. Dr
Verhemel has reported that she has no relationships relevant to the
contents of this paper to disclosure.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Prof Nicolas M.
Van
Mieghem,
Dr
Molewaterplein
40,
3015GD,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. E-mail: n.vanmieghem@
erasmusmc.nl. Twitter: @drnvanmieghem, @verhemel.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Holmes DR, Brennan JM, Rumsfeld JS, et al,
STS/ACC TVT Registry. Clinical outcomes at 1 year
following transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
JAMA. 2015;313(10):1019–1028.
2. Kim WK, Schäfer U, Tchetche D, et al. Incidence
and outcome of peri-procedural transcatheter
heart
valve
embolization
and
migration:
the
TRAVEL
registry
(TranscatheteR
HeArt
Valve
EmboLization
and
Migration).
Eur
Heart
J.
2019;40(38):3156–3165.
3. Landes U, Witberg G, Sathananthan J, et al.
Incidence, causes, and outcomes associated
with urgent implantation of a supplementary
valve
during
transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6(8):936–
944.
KEY WORDS interventional complications,
LVOT migration, stent collapse, structural
heart disease, TAVR, valve complication,
valve-in-valve
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 1 6 , 2 0 2 3
Verhemel et al
J U N E 2 1 , 2 0 2 3 : 1 0 1 8 9 3
LVO Obstruction After THV Migration and Stent Infolding
7
