
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CASE REPORT: HOW WE DID IT
LAVA-ECMO–Supported Dual-
Transcatheter Aortic and Mitral Valve-in-
Valve Replacement in Cardiogenic Shock
Jonathan X. Fang, MBBS,a,b Gennaro Giustino, MD,a Dimitrios Apostolou, MD,a James C. Lee, MD,a
Dee Dee Wang, MD,a Pedro Engel Gonzalez, MD,a Brian P. O’Neill, MD,a Tiberio M. Frisoli, MD,a
William W. O’Neill, MD,a Pedro A. Villablanca, MDa
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVES Mechanical circulatory support is often challenging in patients with cardiogenic shock secondary to
valvular heart disease because of challenging device placement, decreased efﬁcacy, the need for a concomitant device for
left ventricular unloading, or contraindications. Left atrial venoarterial-extracorporeal membranous oxygenation (LAVA-
ECMO) is an emerging technique to achieve simultaneous ventricular unloading and circulatory support unaffected by
valvular disease. The use of LAVA-ECMO for high-risk transcatheter valvular replacement has not been described.
KEY STEPS We describe the case of a patient with cardiogenic shock resulting from dual aortic and mitral bioprosthetic
degeneration who was treated with LAVA-ECMO–supported dual-transcatheter aortic and mitral valve-in-valve
replacement.
POTENTIAL PITFALLS Among many precautions worth mentioning, operators should be aware of the care and ad-
justments of the ECMO circuit required during transcatheter valvular replacement to achieve technical success without
complications. The importance of a careful case planning in a multidisciplinary heart team meeting cannot be
overemphasized.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE LAVA ECMO enables high-risk valvular replacement in patients in valvular cardiogenic
shock. (JACC Case Rep. 2024;29:102564) © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College
of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
C
ardiogenic shock secondary to valvular dis-
ease is difﬁcult to manage because of the
limited options to provide adequate ventric-
ular mechanical support and ventricular unloading.
Venoarterial-extracorporeal
membranous
oxygena-
tion (VA-ECMO) alone increases afterload and impairs
myocardial recovery, and it often requires additional
measures for a left ventricular unloading strategy,
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 LAVA-ECMO
enables
the
performance
of
high-risk percutaneous valvular procedures
that would otherwise not be feasible in pa-
tients in cardiogenic shock who have no
surgical options.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.102564
From the aCenter for Structural Heart Disease, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, USA; and the bDivision of Cardiology,
Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received June 18, 2024; revised manuscript received July 24, 2024, accepted August 9, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
ª 2 0 2 4 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
such as the addition of a microaxial ﬂow
pump in the left ventricle.1 Severe aortic
insufﬁciency
impairs
the
efﬁcacy
of
the
microaxial ﬂow pump and contraindicates
the use of an intra-aortic balloon pump. Left
atrial
venoarterial-extracorporeal
membra-
nous oxygenation (LAVA-ECMO)2-5 involves
sending the outﬂow cannula across a trans-
septal puncture to draw blood from left and
right
atria,
thereby
achieving
mechanical
support with simultaneous left- and right-
sided heart unloading. For our case, we
selected upfront LAVA-ECMO instead of con-
ventional
VA
ECMO
with
the
additional
microaxial ﬂow pump because of the pa-
tient’s severe aortic insufﬁciency and steno-
sis. In addition to the apparent beneﬁt of
achieving both ventricular unloading and
mechanical circulatory support with a single device,
this approach requires only 1 large-bore femoral arte-
rial access instead of 2 large-bore accesses in the case
for VA-ECMO and an additional microaxial pump.
This approach therefore preserves the other femoral
artery for upcoming valvular intervention.
CASE SUMMARY
A 68-year-old woman with degeneration of aortic
(23
Magna,
Edwards
Lifesciences)
and
mitral
(27 Magna, Edwards Lifesciences) bioprostheses, both
implanted 10 years earlier, presented in cardiogenic
shock with severe aortic insufﬁciency and stenosis,
severe mitral stenosis, a left ventricular ejection
fraction of 15%, and cardiorenal syndrome. A trans-
thoracic echocardiogram from an outside institution
showed a transaortic mean gradient of 36 mm Hg and
a transmitral mean gradient of 14 mm Hg. With pro-
gressive cardiogenic shock on increasing doses of
multiple inotropes, she was emergently transferred to
the cardiac catheterization laboratory of our institu-
tion for emergency mechanical circulatory support
as
a
bridge
to
valvular
intervention
during
the
weekend. Cardiac catheterization revealed signiﬁ-
cantly elevated biventricular ﬁlling pressures and
conﬁrmed high transvalvular gradients (Figure 1)
and a cardiac index of 1.28 L/min/m2. Mechanical
circulatory
support
with
LAVA-ECMO
guided
by
intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) (Figures 2A to 2F,
Video 1) enabled biventricular unloading and recov-
ery of hemodynamics and renal function, followed
by
planning
computed
tomography
(CT),
which
showed favorable anatomy—adequate femoral artery
diameter for access, adequate aortic bioprosthesis-to–
coronary artery distance indicating a low risk of sinus
sequestration, and an adequate predicted neo-left
ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT) area indicating a
low risk of LVOT obstruction. The Society of Thoracic
Surgeons score predicted mortality rates of 49.5% and
49.8% for isolated surgical aortic and mitral valve
replacement, respectively, thus reﬂecting prohibitive
surgical risk. We performed simultaneous percuta-
neous dual valve-in-valve replacement with pre-
fracture
of
the
aortic
bioprosthesis
followed
by
transcatheter
aortic
valve
replacement
(TAVR),
transcatheter mitral valve replacement (TMVR), and
ECMO decannulation (Figures 3A to 3I and 4A to 4F).
She was discharged home with outpatient rehabili-
tation. At 1-month follow-up, she was ambulatory and
free
of
symptoms.
Follow-up
echocardiography
showed recovered ventricular and valvular function
(Figures 4C to 4F).
PROCEDURAL STEPS
LAVA-ECMO. All
accesses
were
obtained
with
ultrasound-guided
micropunctures.
Right
internal
jugular vein access with a leave-in pulmonary artery
catheter was placed. Transseptal puncture was per-
formed through the right femoral vein access with a
Brockenbrough needle with a 300-mm Grand slam
0.014-inch coronary wire (Asahi Intecc Medical) in-
side the Brockenbrough needle guided by ICE from
the left femoral vein (Figure 2A). To overcome a stiff
septum, septostomy was performed with a 6-mm
coronary balloon over the 0.014-inch wire, followed
by upsizing to a 0.035-inch Amplatz extrastiff wire
with a NaviCross microcatheter (Terumo Interven-
tional Systems), and then septostomy with a 10-mm
balloon followed by insertion of a 25-/23-F cannula
(LivaNova) through the transseptal puncture with
fenestrations of the cannula over both the left and
right atria. Right femoral artery access was upsized to
an 18-F DrySeal sheath with a hemostatic valve (Gore
Medical). Inside the sheath, a 17-F ECMO return can-
nula was inserted for arterial return at the aortoiliac
junction. The return cannula was placed inside the
sheath
for
better
hemostasis
and
easier
dec-
annulation (Figure 2C). A 6-F right superﬁcial femoral
artery antegrade access was obtained with insertion
of a reperfusion sheath with an arrow metal-braided
sheath. The ECMO circuit was started. There was
signiﬁcant
reduction
of
mean
pulmonary
artery
pressure and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure,
immediately indicating effective unloading of the left
and right sides of the heart. The patient’s kidney
function recovered over the weekend. CT showed no
evidence of LVOT obstruction after TMVR (Figures 2D
and 2E) or of coronary obstruction with TAVR.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
ASD = atrial septal defect
ECMO = extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation
ICE = intracardiac
echocardiography
LAVA-ECMO = left atrial
venoarterial-extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation
LVOT = left ventricular outﬂow
tract
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TMVR = transcatheter mitral
valve replacement
VA-ECMO = venoarterial-
extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation
Fang et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
LAVA-ECMO in TAVR and TMVR in Cardiogenic Shock
O C T O B E R 2 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 5 6 4
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
VISUAL SUMMARY. Schematic Diagram of Accesses and Setup for Left Atrial Venoarterial Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation, Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Replacement, and Transcatheter Mitral Valve Replacement
Baseline hemodynamics and the hemodynamic response to treatment are shown. Key equipment lists for each step of the procedure are as shown. AI/AS ¼ aortic
insufﬁciency/aortic stenosis; ASD ¼ atrial septal defect; ECMO ¼ extracorporeal membranous oxygenation; iASD ¼ iatrogenic atrial septal defect; ICE ¼ intracardiac
echocardiogram; IVC ¼ inferior vena cava; LAVA ¼ left atrial venoarterial; LFA ¼ left femoral artery; LFV ¼ left femoral vein; LRA ¼ left radial artery; LV ¼ left ventricle;
LVEF ¼ left ventricular ejection fraction; MS ¼ mitral stenosis; PA ¼ pulmonary artery; RFA ¼ right femoral artery; RFV ¼ right femoral vein; RIJV ¼ right internal
jugular vein; RRA ¼ right radial artery; RSFA ¼ right superﬁcial femoral artery; TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement; TEE ¼ transesophageal echocar-
diogram; TMVR ¼ transcatheter mitral valve replacement; TR ¼ transradial; VA ¼ venoarterial.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Fang et al
O C T O B E R 2 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 5 6 4
LAVA-ECMO in TAVR and TMVR in Cardiogenic Shock
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
DUAL VALVE-IN-VALVE TAVR WITH PREFRACTURE
AND TMVR WITH PREDILATION. Valve implantation
was performed as an inpatient staged procedure on
the next week after a detailed case planning in a
multidisciplinary heart team meeting. We deployed a
sentinel embolic protection device (Boston Scientiﬁc)
through a right radial artery access. A left radial artery
access was used for the angiographic pigtail. A left
FIGURE 1
Overview: Aortic Valve, Mitral Valve, Tricuspid Valve, and Right-Sided Heart Catheterization
LAVA-ECMO ¼ left atrial venoarterial-extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; Max ¼ maximum; PG ¼ pressure gradient; TEE ¼ transesophageal echocardiogram;
TMVR ¼ transcatheter mitral valve replacement; V ¼ velocity; VTI ¼ velocity time integral.
Fang et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
LAVA-ECMO in TAVR and TMVR in Cardiogenic Shock
O C T O B E R 2 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 5 6 4
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
femoral artery access was obtained and upsized to 14-
F with placement of e-sheaths, preclosed with 2
Percloses (Abbott Cardiovascular). We crossed the
aortic valve with a straight-tip glide wire in an AL1
diagnostic catheter while turning down the ECMO
ﬂow to 3 L/min (Figure 3B), then switched to a Conﬁda
circular-tip wire (Medtronic) in the left ventricle
through a pigtail catheter. We fractured the aortic
bioprosthesis with a 24-mm True Dilatation balloon
(Becton Dickinson) pacing over the Conﬁda wire in
the left ventricle at 180 beats/min (Figure 3C), and we
then deployed a Sapien 3 23-mm Ultra Resilia valve
(Edwards Lifesciences) at nominal pressure pacing
over the Conﬁda wire at 180 beats/min and halting
the ECMO ﬂow during pacing (Figure 3D). ECMO ﬂows
were turned down to 2.5 L, followed by a trial of
further reduction in ﬂow, which was unsuccessful.
We decided to proceed to TMVR with the accesses as
shown (Figure 3A). The patient was intubated, and a
transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was obtained.
We withdrew the LAVA-ECMO venous cannula
from the transseptal position into the inferior vena
cava,
thus
converting
LAVA-ECMO
to
VA-ECMO,
and then recrossed the septum with transseptal
puncture guided by TEE. The left femoral vein ac-
cess was upsized to a 16-F e-sheath. We decreased
ECMO ﬂow to 1.5 L/min. Conversion to VA-ECMO
aided
mitral
valve
opening
and
crossing
while
decreasing ﬂow aimed for gradual weaning from
ECMO.
We
crossed
the
mitral
valve
with
a
0.035-inch glidewire in an Agilis catheter (Abbott
Cardiovascular) (Figure 3E) and exchanged it for a
J-wire
over
a
NaviCross
microcatheter
(Terumo
Interventional Systems) and then a Conﬁda wire in
a multipurpose guide. We predilated with a mitral
valvuloplasty with a 28-mm True Dilatation balloon,
which did showed a tiny
waist (Figure 3F) and
agreeing with the plan to use a 26 mm valve.
We then performed septostomy with an 18-mm
Atlas balloon (Becton Dickinson) (Figure 3G) to facil-
itate delivery of a Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia 26 mm valve
aided by introduction of of 1 mL of volume into the
valve system during delivery of the system across the
septum and the mitral valve, which eases delivery by
FIGURE 2
LAVA-ECMO and Work-Up
(A to C) Transseptal puncture, septostomy, and placement of left atrial venoarterial-extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (LAVA-ECMO) cannulas. (D to F) Computed
tomography analysis for femoral access, left ventricular outﬂow tract obstruction risk prediction, and aortic and mitral bioprosthetic dimensions. CAUD ¼ caudal;
ICE ¼ intracardiac echocardiogram; LAO ¼ left anterior oblique; LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; Min ¼ minimum; RAO ¼ right anterior oblique;
THV ¼ transcatheter heart valve.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Fang et al
O C T O B E R 2 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 5 6 4
LAVA-ECMO in TAVR and TMVR in Cardiogenic Shock
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
a having a streamline tip (Figure 3H). The valve was
deployed balloon at þ2 mL under rapid pacing at 180
beats/min and a breath-hold (Figure 3I).
The hemodynamic response to TAVR and TMVR
and the setup for each step and key equipment list are
shown in the Visual Summary.
ECMO WEANING AND CLOSURE. In view of impaired
right ventricular function with a bidirectional shunt
across the iatrogenic atrial septal defect (ASD), we
closed the defect with an Amplatzer ASD occluder
device (Abbott Cardiovascular) (Figures 4A and 4B).
We weaned the patient from ECMO, followed by
decannulation. Hemostasis was obtained to the right
femoral vein with ﬁgure-of-8 sutures, to the left
femoral vein with 2 predeployed Percloses, to the
right femoral artery with an 18-F Manta (Teleﬂex)
guided
by
ﬂuoroscopy,
to
the
right
superﬁcial
femoral artery with a 6-F Angio-Seal (Terumo Inter-
ventional Systems), and to the left femoral artery
with
2
predeployed
Percloses
(Abbott
FIGURE 3
ViV TAVR and TMVR
(A) Accesses used for concomitant dual valve replacement. (B to D) Valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) showing (B) valve crossing,
(C) prefracture, and (D) valve deployment. (E to I) Valve-in-valve transcatheter mitral valve replacement (TMVR) with (E) valve crossing, (F) predilation,
(G and H) septostomy and valve delivery, and (I) deployment. ECMO ¼ extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; LAVA ¼ left atrial venoarterial; LFA ¼ left femoral artery;
LFV ¼ left femoral vein; LV ¼ left ventricle; PA ¼ pulmonary artery; RA ¼ right atrium; RFA ¼ right femoral artery; RFV ¼ right femoral vein; RSFA ¼ right superﬁcial
femoral artery; RV ¼ right ventricle; TEE ¼ transesophageal echocardiogram; ViV ¼ valve-in-valve.
Fang et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
LAVA-ECMO in TAVR and TMVR in Cardiogenic Shock
O C T O B E R 2 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 5 6 4
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Cardiovascular). The left radial artery access was
used to park an Armada balloon (Abbott Cardiovas-
cular) in the external iliac artery for provisional
balloon assistance during closure and for angio-
graphic conﬁrmation of hemostasis (Figure 4B). He-
mostasis to the radial arteries was achieved with
transradial bands (TR Bands, Terumo Interventional
Systems).
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
The LAVA-ECMO outﬂow cannula position should
allow blood to be drawn from the left atrium and the
right atrium simultaneously. A cannula with fenes-
trations
spread
across
a
considerable
length
is
required. In this case, we used the LivaNova 2-3/25-F
cannula. Septostomy and delivery of the cannula was
done over a stiff wire placed in the proximal left up-
per pulmonary vein. Operators should be aware of the
wire position to avoid vascular trauma. A midseptal
location for transseptal puncture is preferred. Inad-
vertent movement of the LAVA cannula should be
avoided when securing the cannulas in the groin to
avoid the accidental conversion of LAVA-ECMO to
VA-ECMO.
When performing percutaneous valvular replace-
ment with LAVA-ECMO running, caution should be
taken by interventionists and anesthesiologists when
ﬂushing and using any venous accesses because the
ECMO
circuit
could
entrain
air
into
the
venous
system.
Turning down the ECMO ﬂow during and holding
respiration on the ventilator can aid stable valve
positioning
during
deployment.
Temporarily
decreasing the ECMO ﬂow during valve crossing eases
the procedure by encouraging valve opening.
TAVR could increase the risk of left ventricular
outﬂow
tract
(LVOT)
obstruction
post
TMVR
by
decreasing the neo-LVOT predicted.
This should be considered during case planning.
FIGURE 4
Closure and Follow-Up Transthoracic Echocardiogram
(A) Bidirectional shunt shown through the iatrogenic atrial septal defect (iASD) seen on a transesophageal echocardiogram. The iatrogenic atrial septal defect was
closed with an Amplatzer atrial septal defect occluder (B). Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) decannulation and access closure with Manta, Angioseal and
Perclose to the right common femoral artery (RCFA), right superﬁcial femoral artery (RSFA), and left common femoral artery (LCFA), respectively, with angiogram taken
from the left radial artery. (C) The 1-month follow up echocardiogram showing a good hemodynamic result with no signiﬁcant aortic or mitral gradient. (E to F) There
was persistent pulmonary hypertension. ViV ¼ valve-in-valve.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
Fang et al
O C T O B E R 2 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 5 6 4
LAVA-ECMO in TAVR and TMVR in Cardiogenic Shock
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
CONCLUSIONS
This
case
illustrates
the
treatment
of
valvular
cardiogenic stroke secondary to aortic and mitral
bioprosthetic failure with LAVA-ECMO for hemody-
namic support and ventricular unloading followed by
transcatheter
dual
valve-in-valve
replacement.
Awareness of the techniques and potential pitfalls is
crucial for performing this high-risk procedure.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Lee has served as a consultant for Edwards Lifesciences. Dr Wang
has served as a consultant for Edwards Lifesciences, Abbott, and
Boston Scientiﬁc. Dr B.P. O’Neill has served as a consultant to and has
received research support from Edwards Lifesciences. Dr Frisoli has
served
as
a
proctor
for
Edwards
Lifesciences,
Abbott,
Boston
Scientiﬁc, and Medtronic. Dr W. O’Neill has served as a consultant for
Abiomed, Edwards Lifesciences, Medtronic, Boston Scientiﬁc, Abbott
Vascular, and St Jude Medical; and has served on the Board of Di-
rectors of Neovasc. Dr Villablanca has served as a consultant for
Edwards Lifesciences and Teleﬂex. All other authors have reported
that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper
to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Jonathan X.
Fang, Center for Structural Heart Disease, Henry Ford
Hospital, 2799 West Grand Boulevard, Detroit, Mich-
igan 48202, USA. E-mail: fangjonathan@gmail.com.
OR Dr Pedro A. Villablanca, Center for Structural
Heart Disease, Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 West Grand
Boulevard, Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA. E-mail:
pvillab1@hfhs.org.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Bernard
S,
Deferm
S,
Bertrand
PB.
Acute
valvular emergencies. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc
Care. 2022;11(8):653–665.
2. Chiang M, Gonzalez PE, O’Neill BP, et al. Left
atrial
venoarterial
extracorporeal
membrane
oxygenation for acute aortic regurgitation and
cardiogenic shock. JACC Case Rep. 2022;4(5):276–
279.
3. Lemor A, Basir MB, O’Neill BP, et al. Left
atrial-veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation:
step-by-step
procedure
and
case
example.
Struct
Heart.
2022;6(6):
100117.
4. Phillip R, Howard J, Hawamdeh H, Tribble T,
Gurley J, Saha S. Left atrial veno-arterial extracor-
poreal membrane oxygenation case series: a single-
center experience. J Surg Res. 2023;281:238–244.
5. Villablanca P, Al-Darzi W, Boshara A, et al. Left
atrial
venoarterial
extracorporeal
membrane
oxygenation for patients in cardiogenic shock and
acute aortic regurgitation. JACC Cardiovasc Interv.
2022;15(20):2112–2114.
KEY WORDS cardiogenic shock, dual valve-
in-valve replacement, ECMO, LAVA-TAVR,
mechanical circulatory support, TMVR
APPENDIX For a supplemental
video, please see the online version of this
paper.
Fang et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 2 9 , 2 0 2 4
LAVA-ECMO in TAVR and TMVR in Cardiogenic Shock
O C T O B E R 2 , 2 0 2 4 : 1 0 2 5 6 4
8
