
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE 
CLINICAL CASE 
Delayed Mitral Prosthesis Dehiscence 
Following Transcatheter Aortic 
Valve Replacement 
Sahri Kim, MD, a Hyun Jung Koo, MD, b Jung-Min Ahn, MD, c Jae-Kwan Song, MD, c Duk-Woo Park, MD, c 
Jae Suk Yoo, MD a 
ABSTRACT 
BACKGROUND The presence of preexisting mitral prosthesis in transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) raises 
concerns about potential valve interaction; however, this issue remains insufficiently explored. 
CASE SUMMARY A 79-year-old man presented with hemolysis 8 months post-TAVR. He had a history of mitral valve 
replacement 16 years prior. Further investigation revealed severe paravalvular leakage of the mitral valve, which was 
attributed to the dehiscence of the mitral prosthesis. A retrospective review of pre-TAVR computed tomography images 
identified a subtle, previously undetected defect in the mitral–aortic intervalvular fibrosa, likely masked by neointima. 
DISCUSSION We hypothesize that chronic mechanical stress between the TAVR device and the mitral–aortic inter-
valvular fibrosa causes progressive damage, resulting in delayed mitral valve dehiscence and hemolysis. 
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Careful preprocedural evaluation and prolonged postprocedural surveillance are essential 
for patients with preexisting mitral prostheses after TAVR due to the potential for delayed long-term complications. 
(JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:104565) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION 
A 79-year-old man presented to the emergency 
department with a 1-month history of progressively 
worsening shortness of breath and recent dark brown 
urine. Initial assessment revealed hemodynamic 
stability; 
however, 
laboratory 
findings 
showed 
elevated total bilirubin (10.9 mg/dL), decreased he-
moglobin (7.9 g/dL), significantly elevated lactate 
dehydrogenase (3523 IU/L), and increased reticulo-
cyte count (8.6%), suggestive of hemolysis. The pa-
tient was admitted for further evaluation. 
The patient’s medical history included mitral 
valve replacement (MVR) with a 29-mm Sorin me-
chanical valve (Sorin Biomedica, S.p.A.) and de 
Vega tricuspid annuloplasty (TAP) 16 years prior. 
Additionally, 8 months before the current admis-
sion, the patient underwent transcatheter aortic 
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104565 
From the a Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea; b Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea; and the c Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. 
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center. 
Manuscript received March 4, 2025; revised manuscript received April 7, 2025, accepted May 14, 2025. 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S  
V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 2 ,  2 0 2 5  
© 2 0 2 5  T H E  A U T H O R S .  P U B L I S H E D  B Y  E L S E V I E R  O N  B E H A L F  O F  T H E  A M E R I C A N  
C O L L E G E  O F  C A R D I O L O G Y  F O U N D A T I O N .  T H I S  I S  A N  O P E N  A C C E S S  A R T I C L E  U N D E R  
T H E  C C  B Y - N C - N D  L I C E N S E  ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .  

=== PAGE 2 ===
valve replacement (TAVR) for worsening 
aortic stenosis. Preprocedural computed 
tomography 
(CT), 
performed 
to 
assess 
aortic valve anatomy and suitability for 
TAVR, revealed an aorto-mitral distance of 
5.8 mm, and an annulus area of 522 mm 2 , a 
short diameter of 22.6 mm, and a long 
diameter of 30.0 mm (Figures 1A and 1B). 
3mensio Medical Imaging BV revealed a 
valve 
calcium 
volume 
of 
629 
at 
450 
Hounsfield units (cutoff: 500) (Figure 1C). 
According to our center’s TAVR protocol, 
this patient would typically be considered 
for 5% to 10% oversizing with preballoon 
valvuloplasty. However, due to the large calcium 
deposit in the left ventricular outflow tract, and 
associated risk of rupture, a decision was made to 
implant a 26-mm Sapien 3 Ultra (Edwards Life-
sciences) balloon-expandable (BE) valve at nominal 
volume (− 0.6% downsizing). Preballoon valvulo-
plasty was performed using a 20-mm Z-MED 
balloon (B. Braun Interventional Systems Inc), 
selected to avoid exceeding the annulus short 
diameter. Postballoon dilatation was not performed 
(Video 1). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) 
conducted the day after TAVR showed that both 
the prosthetic aortic and mitral valves functioned 
well. After antibiotic treatment for a urinary tract 
infection before TAVR, the patient was discharged 
on the seventh day after the procedure without 
significant complications. Follow-up TTE performed 
1-month 
post-TAVR 
confirmed 
well-functioning 
prosthetic 
aortic 
and 
mitral 
valves 
without 
abnormalities. 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS 
Hemolysis caused by paravalvular leakage (PVL) was 
initially suspected based on the patient’s medical 
history. 
INVESTIGATIONS 
TTE and transesophageal echocardiography were 
performed to assess the patient’s cardiac valves, 
particularly the prosthetic mitral and aortic valves. 
Additionally, CT was performed, and prior imaging 
studies were reevaluated. 
Echocardiography revealed a 3-mm gap with se-
vere PVL at the anteromedial aspect of the mitral 
valve, with no signs of endocarditis (Figures 2A to 2D, 
Video 2). Moderate eccentric tricuspid regurgitation 
was observed, whereas no abnormalities were found 
in the aortic prosthetic valve. 
MANAGEMENT 
To address the mitral valve dehiscence, a redo MVR 
with TAP was performed under general anesthesia 
with 
double-lumen 
intubation. 
A 
right 
mini- 
thoracotomy approach was selected because of the 
previous sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was 
established via arterial cannulation of the femoral 
artery and bicaval venous cannulation of the femoral 
and internal jugular veins. Severe peri-aortic adhe-
sions prevented aortic cross clamping. Therefore, the 
procedure was performed under fibrillatory arrest. 
Intraoperative findings, consistent with preoperative 
echocardiography, confirmed dehiscence of the 
mitral prosthesis at the 12 to 3 o’clock position 
(Figure 3). The previous prosthesis was removed, and 
MVR was completed using a 27-mm Mosaic tissue 
valve (Medtronic), along with TAP using the Clover 
technique. Fibrillation and cardiopulmonary bypass 
times were 49 and 105 minutes, respectively. 
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP 
The patient was transferred from the intensive care 
unit to the general ward on the third postoperative 
day. A postoperative TTE on the seventh day 
revealed mild PVL of the mitral valve, with no evi-
dence of hemolysis. The patient was discharged on 
the twelfth postoperative day without any significant 
complications. 
DISCUSSION 
TAVR is a well-established alternative to surgical 
aortic valve replacement in patients with severe 
aortic stenosis who are at intermediate to high sur-
gical risk. 1 Although prior valve replacement signifi-
cantly increases the surgical risk and may make 
patients suitable candidates for TAVR, these in-
dividuals are often excluded from randomized 
controlled trials and registries. 2 In addition, due to 
the anatomic proximity of the aortic and mitral 
valves, theoretical concerns exists regarding valve 
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES 
• This case highlights the need for heightened 
vigilance regarding delayed mechanical 
complications, such as mitral valve dehis-
cence, after TAVR in patients with preex-
isting mitral prostheses. 
• Continuous 
and 
thorough 
follow-up, 
supported by careful preprocedural imaging 
analysis, is essential for identifying and 
addressing potential long-term issues that 
may not be immediately evident. 
A B B R E V I A T I O N S  
A N D  A C R O N Y M S  
BE = ballon-expandable 
CT = computed tomography 
MVR = mitral valve 
replacement 
PVL = paravalvular leakage 
SE = self-expandable 
TAP = tricuspid annuloplasty 
TAVR = transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement 
TTE = transthoracic 
echocardiography 
Kim et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 2 ,  2 0 2 5  
Mitral Dehiscence After Aortic Implantation 
A U G U S T  6 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 5 6 5  
2 

=== PAGE 3 ===
interactions when TAVR is performed in the presence 
of an existing mitral prosthesis. 
Recent literature suggests that TAVR can be safely 
performed even in patients with an existing mitral 
prosthesis, provided that it is carefully selected. 3-6 
However, serious complications have been reported. 
Although complications, such as PVL or valve 
embolization, are generally associated with the TAVR 
prosthesis due to the presence of a firmly seated 
mitral prosthesis, some cases involve complications 
directly affecting the mitral prosthesis itself. Squiers 
et al 7 described a case of mitral prosthesis impinge-
ment after the reballooning of a TAVR prosthesis to 
address moderate PVL. Previously, Acar et al 8 docu-
mented a case of abnormal mitral prosthesis function 
immediately after TAVR deployment, which led to 
hemodynamic instability and resulted in mortality 
within 1 hour of the procedure. 
However, although previously reported complica-
tions occurred during or shortly after the procedure, 
we think this case is the first report of a direct me-
chanical long-term complication resulting from valve 
interactions. In our case, neither the pre- nor post- 
TAVR echocardiograms showed findings suggestive 
of PVL, and the pre-TAVR CT scan deemed the pa-
tient suitable for TAVR. Considering the absence of 
clinical symptoms and normal echocardiographic re-
sults, identifying any underlying defects in earlier CT 
images before the onset of hemolysis proves chal-
lenging. However, following the onset of symptoms, 
a closer retrospective review of the previous CT scan 
revealed a subtle preexisting defect at the mitral– 
aortic intervalvular fibrosa, which had likely been 
covered by neointima, thus preventing immediate 
detection and clinical significance (Figure 4A and 4B). 
Given the patient’s symptoms emerged >6 months 
postprocedure, we hypothesized that prolonged me-
chanical interaction between the TAVR device and 
the mitral–aortic intervalvular fibrosa gradually 
induced stress, ultimately resulting in delayed mitral 
prosthesis dehiscence and subsequent hemolysis. 
An important anatomic factor to consider is the 
aorto-mitral distance. In a study by Amat-Santos 
et al, 4 TAVR device embolization occurred in 6 of 91 
patients with prior mitral prostheses, all of whom 
had an aorto-mitral distance <7 mm. Although 
FIGURE 1 Pretranscatheter Aortic Valve Replacement Computed Tomography 
Pretranscatheter aortic valve replacement computed tomography measuring aorto-mitral distance (A), short and long annular diameter (B), 
and valve calcium volume (C). 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 2 ,  2 0 2 5  
Kim et al 
A U G U S T  6 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 5 6 5  
Mitral Dehiscence After Aortic Implantation 
3 

=== PAGE 4 ===
embolization differs mechanistically from our case, 
both may reflect adverse outcomes of valve-valve 
interaction. In our case, the distance measured in 
pre-TAVR CT was 5.8 mm, and although the proced-
ure 
itself 
was 
uncomplicated, 
this 
may 
have 
contributed 
to 
the 
delayed 
structural 
failure 
observed. 
Valve selection is another unresolved issue in this 
context. Although direct comparative studies on the 
impact of BE and self-expandable (SE) TAVR valves 
on the mitral valve are limited, SE valves exert lower 
radial force at deployment but gradually expand 
beyond their nominal diameter over time, whereas 
BE valves achieve a fixed diameter on deployment. 
Therefore, once a BE TAVR has healed in, the pres-
sure 
on 
the 
surrounding 
structures 
stabilizes, 
whereas SE TAVRs continue to exert force against 
FIGURE 2 Echocardiography Demonstrating the Paravavlular Leakage 
Echography demonstrating a gap (arrow) at the anteromedial aspect of the mitral valve and associated regurgitant leakage flow. Two-dimensional (A and B) and 3- 
dimensional (C and D) views of mitral prosthesis. 
FIGURE 3 Dehiscence of the Mitral Valve Prosthesis 
Intraoperative view confirming dehiscence of the mitral valve prosthesis at the 12 to 3 
o’clock position (arrow). 
Kim et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 2 ,  2 0 2 5  
Mitral Dehiscence After Aortic Implantation 
A U G U S T  6 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 5 6 5  
4 

=== PAGE 5 ===
adjacent tissue. 9 Therefore, the use of an SE valve in 
this case may have only delayed the interaction with 
the mitral prosthesis, and a similar outcome would 
have occurred regardless of valve type. 
This case underscores the need for vigilance 
regarding the potential for delayed complications, 
such as mitral valve dehiscence, after TAVR in pa-
tients with preexisting prosthetic mitral valves. 
Although the ideal valve type in this setting remains 
uncertain, minimizing overlap and avoiding direct 
contact between prostheses may be more critical 
than the device platform itself. Further research is 
needed to define clearer guidelines for patient se-
lection, including parameters such as aorto-mitral 
distance and angle, procedural planning (eg, im-
plantation depth), and device-specific consider-
ations. Until more robust data are available, TAVR in 
patients with prior mitral prostheses should be 
approached with heightened caution. Prospective 
studies with larger patient cohorts and longer follow- 
up periods are essential to confirm our findings 
and 
guide 
future 
clinical 
practice. 
Close 
and 
prolonged postprocedural surveillance is strongly 
recommended for patients with similar risk profiles 
to monitor for delayed complications that may arise 
from chronic prosthetic interaction. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This case highlights the importance of recognizing 
that previously undetected structural vulnerabilities, 
including concealed dehiscence, may become clini-
cally significant in patients with an in situ prosthetic 
mitral valve after TAVR. Careful preprocedural im-
aging and long-term monitoring are essential in such 
cases. 
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES 
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose. 
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Jae Suk Yoo, 
Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, 
Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 
05505, South Korea. E-mail: mdyoo77@gmail.com. 
FIGURE 4 CT Findings of the Aortomitral Continuity 
Comparison of pretranscatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) computed tomography (CT) (A) and CT from the index admission (B). The 
arrow indicates the site of valve dehiscence. It is suspected that a subtle defect was obscured by neointima on the pre-TAVR CT. 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 2 ,  2 0 2 5  
Kim et al 
A U G U S T  6 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 5 6 5  
Mitral Dehiscence After Aortic Implantation 
5 

=== PAGE 6 ===
R E F E R E N C E S  
1. Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. 2014 
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association task force on practice guidelines. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:e57–e185. 
2. Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack M, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic-valve implantation for aortic ste-
nosis in patients who cannot undergo surgery. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;363:1597–1607. https://doi. 
org/10.1056/NEJMoa1011205 
3. Thourani VH, Kelly JJ, Cervantes DG, et al. 
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement after prior 
mitral valve surgery: results from the trans-
catheter valve therapy registry. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2020;109:1789–1796. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
athoracsur.2019.08.113 
4. Amat-Santos IJ, Cortés C, Nombela Franco L, 
et 
al. 
Prosthetic 
mitral 
surgical 
valve 
in 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement recipients: 
a multicenter analysis. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2017;10:1973–1981. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jcin.2017.07.045 
5. Salaun E, Pibarot P. Transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation after mitral valve replacement: in-
sights from the OPTIMAL registry. Can J Cardiol. 
2019;35:805–808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca. 
2019.04.014 
6. Chmielak Z, Da˛browski M, Tyczy 
nski P, et al. 
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement in patients 
with previous mitral valve replacement: a sys-
tematic study. Adv Interv Cardiol. 2020;16:177– 
183. https://doi.org/10.5114/aic.2020.96061 
7. Squiers JJ, Hebeler KR, DiMaio JM, et al. 
Impingement of single-tilting disc mitral prosthesis 
during transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2016;102:e529–e531. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.05.030 
8. Acar B, Kuyumcu S, Aydin S, et al. Fatal pros-
thetic mitral valve encroachment during trans-
catheter aortic valve implantation. Int J Cardiol. 
2015;182:235–236. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijcard.2014.12.125 
9. Appa H, Park K, Bezuidenhout D, et al. The 
technological basis of a balloon-expandable TAVR 
system: non-occlusive deployment, anchorage in 
the absence of calcification and polymer leaflets. 
Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022;9:791949. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2022.791949 
KEY WORDS paravalvular leakage, TAVR, 
valve dehiscence, valve interaction 
APPENDIX For supplemental videos, 
please see the online version of this paper. 
Kim et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 2 ,  2 0 2 5  
Mitral Dehiscence After Aortic Implantation 
A U G U S T  6 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 5 6 5  
6 
