
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS 
FIRST-IN-HUMAN/EARLY REPORTS 
First-in-Human BASILICA Before 
Valve-in-Valve TAVR in a Mechanically 
Expanded, Legacy Valve 
Ahmed Ghoneem, MD, a L. Wiley Nifong, MD, b Brian Cabarrus, MD, c Paul Mahoney, MD c 
ABSTRACT 
BACKGROUND The Lotus valve is a mechanically expanded transcatheter heart valve with design features that pose 
challenges for valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement (ViV-TAVR). Performing BASILICA (bioprosthetic or 
native aortic scallop intentional laceration to prevent iatrogenic coronary artery obstruction during TAVR) to modify the 
Lotus leaflets has only been reported in benchtop models. 
FIRST-IN-HUMAN/EARLY REPORTS SUMMARY A 79-year-old woman with a degenerated 23-mm Lotus trans-
catheter heart valve and high risk of coronary occlusion underwent BASILICA, followed by implantation of a 26-mm 
Evolut FX valve. Conservative postdilation was performed to optimize valve expansion while minimizing risk of unrav-
eling the Lotus frame. 
DISCUSSION Although the Lotus valve has a low profile, valve canting and a high implant are risk factors for sinus seques-
tration with ViV-TAVR. This case demonstrates BASILICA’s feasibility and key procedural adaptations required for success. 
NOVELTY First-in-human report of BASILICA to prevent coronary obstruction before ViV-TAVR in a Lotus transcatheter 
heart valve. 
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES BASILICA can mitigate coronary obstruction risk before ViV-TAVR inside a Lotus valve. 
Conservative postdilation can achieve excellent hemodynamics while preserving frame integrity. (JACC Case Rep. 
2025;30:104669) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
T 
he Lotus valve (Boston Scientific) is a me-
chanically expanded transcatheter heart 
valve (THV) with unique design features. 
These include a dense nitinol frame that prevents 
coronary access through the frame, a locking mecha-
nism that prevents overexpansion, and thick posts. 1 
We report a complex valve-in-valve (ViV) transcath-
eter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) in a failed Lotus 
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES 
• BASILICA in a Lotus valve is feasible and can 
mitigate coronary obstruction risk before 
ViV-TAVR. 
• Conservative 
postdilation 
can 
achieve 
excellent hemodynamics while preserving 
frame integrity. 
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104669 
From the a Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (Harrisburg), Harrisburg, Pennsyl-
vania, USA; b Division of Cardiac Surgery, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina, USA; and the c Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina, USA. 
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center. 
Manuscript received April 25, 2025; revised manuscript received May 16, 2025, accepted June 4, 2025. 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S  
V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 4 ,  2 0 2 5  
© 2 0 2 5  T H E  A U T H O R S .  P U B L I S H E D  B Y  E L S E V I E R  O N  B E H A L F  O F  T H E  A M E R I C A N  
C O L L E G E  O F  C A R D I O L O G Y  F O U N D A T I O N .  T H I S  I S  A N  O P E N  A C C E S S  A R T I C L E  U N D E R  
T H E  C C  B Y - N C - N D  L I C E N S E  ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .  

=== PAGE 2 ===
THV with a high risk of coronary occlusion, 
mitigated by BASILICA (bioprosthetic or 
native aortic scallop intentional laceration 
to 
prevent 
iatrogenic 
coronary 
artery 
obstruction during TAVR). 2 
CASE SUMMARY 
The case was a 79-year-old woman with a 
history of implantation of 23-mm Lotus 
TAVR valve for severe symptomatic aortic 
stenosis as part of a clinical trial in 2019. Her 
past medical history was also notable for 
heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction 
(25%), cardiac resynchronization therapy 
with 
defibrillator 
implantation, 
insulin- 
dependent diabetes mellitus, hypertension, 
and chronic kidney disease. She presented with 
NYHA functional class III dyspnea and recurrent 
hospitalizations with decompensated heart failure. 
Echocardiogram revealed thickened prosthetic valve 
leaflets and severe stenosis (peak velocity: 4.8 m/s, 
mean gradient: 53 mm Hg, effective orifice area: 
0.5 cm 2 , dimensionless valve index: 0.15). 
Computed tomography angiography revealed an 
underexpanded valve with a diameter of 20.6 mm 
and coronary heights of the left main coronary artery 
at 10.3 mm and right coronary artery (RCA) at 15 mm 
(Figure 1). The Lotus valve was not aligned with the 
native commissures, with the left main coronary ar-
tery and RCA practically arising from the same neo- 
sinus, and there was a valve post lying immediately 
in front of the RCA ostium. Moreover, the valve was 
canted toward the right coronary cusp (RCC) with the 
frame coming up to the sinotubular junction (STJ). 
The virtual THV-to-coronary distance (VTC) and vir-
tual THV-to-STJ were narrow (3.6 and 1.9, respec-
tively) at the RCC, with a predicted high risk of sinus 
sequestration. 
The patient was deemed a prohibitive risk for THV 
explant and surgical aortic valve replacement by a 
heart team. ViV-TAVR was the only therapeutic op-
tion if risk of right coronary occlusion could be 
mitigated, and she was referred to our center for this 
after being turned down by 2 other centers. We 
planned to perform BASILICA to lacerate the leaflet 
and expose more of the Lotus frame, therefore 
allowing more blood flow through the frame into the 
sinus (or depressurize the sinus). Given the unique 
design of the Lotus, with a theoretical risk of 
unlocking the prosthesis with balloon inflation, we 
sought to avoid/minimize balloon inflation. We 
selected the 26-mm self-expanding Evolut FX (Med-
tronic) for better hemodynamics and a lower risk of 
unlocking the prosthesis. Moreover, if postdilatation 
was required, smaller balloons could be used than 
that of the alternative 23-mm balloon-expandable 
Sapien 3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences). 
PROCEDURAL DETAILS 
We proceeded under general anesthesia and with 
transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) guidance. An 
8-F arterial sheath was placed in the right femoral 
artery (RFA), and a 7-F sheath was placed in the left 
femoral artery, using a modified Seldinger technique 
under ultrasound guidance. A Perclose Prostyle 
(Abbott Vascular) device was then deployed at the 
right arteriotomy in the fashion of preclosure with 
knot tagged to the drape. A J wire was placed through 
each Perclose Prostyle device and a 14-F sheath was 
advanced through the RFA access site. A 6-F sheath 
was then placed in the left femoral vein. 
Only nonselective angiography of the RCA was 
possible behind the Lotus valve frame, given 
how sequestered the RCC was at baseline (Figure 2A, 
Video 1). The fluoroscopic projections required for 
leaflet traversal were unattainable (right anterior 
oblique: 67, cranial: 56); therefore, compromise or near 
angles were used, in addition to TEE imaging. Using a 
multipurpose (MP) guide catheter, a gooseneck snare 
was placed in the left ventricular outflow tract, and a 
V18 wire was used to ensure position in the left 
ventricle. A series of catheters were aimed at the right 
leaflet to lacerate the base of the cusp in front of the 
RCA. This was challenging given complex angles and 
the position of the RCA ostium near the post of the 
Lotus. We were able to find an appropriate crossing site 
using a telescoping system consisting of a 5-F MP 
catheter inside an 7FAL1 guide (Figure 2B, Video 2). An 
Astato 20 wire was advanced to the leaflet inside a 
piggyback microcatheter, electrified to traverse the 
leaflet, and then snared in the left ventricle and exter-
nalized through the MP catheter (Video 3). The flying V 
was created by denuding a 1-mm segment on one side of 
the Astato wire just in front of the piggyback, then 
kinking this segment over the back of the scalpel blade. 
This was then advanced to the leaflet (Figure 2D). The 
Astato wire was then electrified at 50 W while injecting 
5% dextrose through both guide catheters, and tension 
was applied from both ends of the Astato to lacerate the 
leaflet (Figure 2E, Video 4). The resultant leaflet splay 
and aortic regurgitation were confirmed on TEE. Both 
guide catheters were then taken out. 
We then proceeded with TAVR in standard 
fashion. The valve was recrossed, and a double 
curved Lunderquist wire was placed near the apex 
of the left ventricle. The native valve was crossed 
A B B R E V I A T I O N S  
A N D  A C R O N Y M S  
MP = multipurpose 
RCA = right coronary artery 
RCC = right coronary cusp 
RFA = right femoral artery 
STJ = sinotubular junction 
TAVR = transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement 
TEE = transesophageal 
echocardiogram 
THV = transcatheter heart 
valve 
ViV = valve-in-valve 
VTC = virtual THV-to-coronary 
distance 
Ghoneem et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 4 ,  2 0 2 5  
First-in-Human Report of BASILICA to Facilitate ViV TAVR Inside a Degenerated Lotus Valve 
A U G U S T  2 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 6 6 9  
2 

=== PAGE 3 ===
VISUAL SUMMARY Lotus Valve: Design, Dimensions and Risk of Sinus Sequestration 
(A) Lotus valve dimensions and design features. (B) ViV-TAVR with a self-expanding valve inside a Lotus valve (neoskirt length: 13 mm, with 6 mm of uncovered 
frame). (C) Risk of sinus sequestration after ViV-TAVR. (i) Low risk in an optimally implanted Lotus valve (ie, valve outflow below the STJ [black dashed line]). Blood 
flow (red arrow) into the SOV mostly comes from above the valve frame, with some flow through the frame above the neoskirt. (ii) High risk in our case, with a high 
valve (ie outflow above the STJ) that is canted toward the right SOV. Blood flow into the SOV is mostly through the frame above the neoskirt. (iii) The effect of 
BASILICA, allowing more flow into the SOV through the valve frame. SOV = sinus of Valsalva; STJ = sinotubular junction distance; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement; ViV = valve-in-valve. 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 4 ,  2 0 2 5  
Ghoneem et al 
A U G U S T  2 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 6 6 9  
First-in-Human Report of BASILICA to Facilitate ViV TAVR Inside a Degenerated Lotus Valve 
3 

=== PAGE 4 ===
using the Evolut. The valve was then unsheathed 
slowly under direct fluoroscopic guidance using a 
pigtail 
position 
and 
angiography 
as 
needed 
(Figure 2F, Video 5). Rapid pacing was performed. 
The valve was then unsheathed to the 2/3 position 
rapidly. Valve position was then assessed by 
aortography in 2 oblique views. The valve was then 
fully unsheathed and disengaged from the delivery 
catheter. The delivery system was then pulled into 
the descending aorta and removed after it was 
redocked with the nosecone. After valve release, the 
Evolut was noted to be underexpanded and an 
invasive gradient across the valve was 22 mm Hg 
(Figure 2G, Video 6). We elected to pursue a con-
servative postdilation strategy using a 20-mm True 
balloon, correlating with the minor axis of the 
Lotus. This balloon was inflated once (Figure 2H, 
Video 7). The final invasive gradient was 4 mm Hg 
across the aortic valve. 
The RFA sheath were removed, and the Perclose 
Prostyle knot was delivered to the arteriotomy, fol-
lowed by an Angioseal for hemostasis. The left 
femoral artery sheath was removed with another 
Angioseal device to achieve hemostasis. 
The patient was seen for follow-up at 2 and 
6 weeks after her procedure. She reported significant 
FIGURE 1 Case Plan 
Computed tomography angiography showing (A) inner diameter at valve inflow; (B) inner diameter at the midlevel of the valve; (C) inner diameter at valve outflow; (D) 
height of the LMCA; (E) height of the RCA; (F) distance from the valve frame to the aortic wall, showing that the valve is canted toward the right coronary and 
noncoronary cusps; (G) valve outflow above the STJ at the LCC; (H) valve outflow above the STJ at the RCC; (I) left VTC, (J) right VTC; (K) left VTSTJ; and (L) right VTSTJ. 
LCC = left coronary cusp; LMCA = left main coronary artery; NCC = non-coronary cusp; RCA = right coronary artery; RCC = right coronary cusp; STJ = sinotubular 
junction; VTC = virtual transcatheter heart valve-to-coronary distance; VT-STJ = virtual transcatheter heart valve-to-sinotubular junction distance. 
Ghoneem et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 4 ,  2 0 2 5  
First-in-Human Report of BASILICA to Facilitate ViV TAVR Inside a Degenerated Lotus Valve 
A U G U S T  2 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 6 6 9  
4 

=== PAGE 5 ===
improvement in her level of activity, with minimal 
shortness 
of 
breath. 
A 
repeat 
echocardiogram 
revealed an improved ejection fraction to 40% and a 
mean gradient of 10 mm Hg across the TAVR valve. 
NOVELTY OF THE SUBMISSION 
ViV-TAVR inside a degenerated Lotus THV’s has 
previously been successful using both self-expanding 
and 
balloon-expandable 
THVs. 1,3,4 
However, 
BASILICA to modify the Lotus leaflets has only been 
reported in benchtop models. 5 To our knowledge, 
this is the first reported experience of successful 
BASILICA to prevent coronary obstruction before 
ViV-TAVR inside a Lotus valve. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Approximately 13,000 patients were treated with the 
Lotus valve before its discontinuation in 2020, and 
many of them will eventually require reintervention 
for bioprosthetic valve failure. 1 We describe several 
unique risk factors of coronary obstruction in this 
case that are unusual with the Lotus valve given its 
FIGURE 2 Step-by-Step Sequence 
(A) Nonselective angiography of the RCA. (B) An appropriate site to cross the leaflet was found using an MP GC inside an AL1 GC. (C) The leaflet was traversed using an 
electrified Astato leaflet, and snared in the left ventricle to create the electrosurgical loop. (D) The flying V was advanced to the leaflet. (E) Traction applied to both 
GCs while electrifying the Astato wire to lacerate the leaflet. (F) Unsheathing the Evolut valve. (G) Evolut valve noted to be underexpanded after release. (H) Valve 
postdilated with a 20-mm true balloon. GC = guide catheter; LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract; MP = multipurpose; RCA = right coronary artery. 
EQUIPMENT LIST 
A) Arterial and venous access 
• Ultrasound machine (Philips Healthcare, USA) 
• Micropuncture needle and wire 
• 0.035-inch J wire 
• 7-F sheath – LFA 
• 8-F sheath – RFA 
• 14-F sheath – RFA 
• 6-F sheath – LFV 
• Proglide Prostyle (Abbott Vascular, USA) – RFA 
• Angioseal ×2 (Terumo, Japan) – LFA & RFA 
B) BASILICA 
• 5-F Multipurpose catheter 
• 6-F Multipurpose catheter 
• 7-F AL1 guide catheter 
• 0.035-inch V-18 wire (Boston Scientific, USA) 
• 15-mm Gooseneck Snare (Medtronic, USA) 
• 0.014-inch Astato 20 wire (Asahi, Japan) 
• Piggyback microcatheter ×2 (Teleflex, USA) 
• Scalpel 
• Electrosurgery pencil 
• 5% dextrose solution × 2 
D) TAVR 
• Pigtail catheter 
• Pacemaker 
• Evolut FX+ delivery catheter system with inline sheath 14-F 
(Medtronic Inc, USA) 
• True Balloon 20 mm (BD Medical, USA) 
LFA = left femoral artery; LFV = left femoral vein; RFA = right femoral artery. 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 4 ,  2 0 2 5  
Ghoneem et al 
A U G U S T  2 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 6 6 9  
First-in-Human Report of BASILICA to Facilitate ViV TAVR Inside a Degenerated Lotus Valve 
5 

=== PAGE 6 ===
low profile and short neoskirt of approximately 
13 mm. These included the high implant, with the 
valve outflow above the STJ, and the canted valve 
toward the RCC. It is important to note that the Lotus 
valve was usually used in patients with hostile aortic 
anatomies. Consequently, similar anatomic risks for 
coronary 
obstruction 
with 
ViV-TAVR 
may 
be 
encountered more frequently than initially pre-
dicted. Moreover, this case highlights that a conser-
vative approach to postdilation after ViV-TAVR can 
result in good hemodynamics without damaging the 
Lotus frame or risking annular rupture in similarly 
hostile anatomies. 
The Lotus has been an orphan valve since its 
discontinuation, with little support from the parent 
company. Limited recommendations on ViV-TAVR 
have been made based on case series, such as 
consideration of surgical explant in patients at risk 
for coronary obstruction. 1 This case highlights that 
BASILICA in these patients is feasible, and provides 
guidance on some of the technical challenges that 
may be encountered in this situation. With more 
patients outliving their TAVR valves and ViV-TAVR 
becoming more required, leaflet modification pro-
cedures will need to be performed at more structural 
programs. Dedicated leaflet modification devices 
(currently in development) may help overcome some 
of the challenges highlighted in this case and 
democratize leaflet modification in the future. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Although the Lotus valve has a low profile, valve 
canting and a high implant are risk factors for sinus 
sequestration. This is the first-in-human report of 
BASILICA to mitigate this risk and facilitate ViV- 
TAVR with a self-expanding valve inside a Lotus 
valve. 
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES 
Dr Mahoney has served as a consultant for Medtronic and Edwards 
Lifesciences. All other authors have reported that they have no re-
lationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose. 
ADDRESS 
FOR 
CORRESPONDENCE: 
Dr 
Ahmed 
Ghoneem, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (Harrisburg), 
205 South Front Street, Brady Hall, Suite 3C, Harris-
burg, Pennsylvania 17105, USA. E-mail: ghoneema@ 
upmc.edu. X handle: @a_h_ghoneem. 
R E F E R E N C E S  
1. Alfadhel M, Frawley C, Sathananthan J, et al. 
Redo transcatheter aortic valve implantation in 
the lotus mechanically expanded transcatheter 
heart valve: bench-top analysis, clinical experi-
ence, and procedural guidance. Circ Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2023;16:e013296. 
2. Khan JM, Dvir D, Greenbaum AB, et al. Trans-
catheter laceration of aortic leaflets to prevent 
coronary obstruction during transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement: concept to first-in-human. 
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;11:677–689. 
3. Yadav 
PK, 
Rajagopal 
V, 
Sayegh 
H, 
Rangarajan V, Thourani VH, Kauten J. First report 
of sapien 3 in lotus. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2020;13:2704–2707. 
4. Stolte T, Winkel D, Haaf P, Nestelberger T. 
First report of evolut pro+ transcatheter aortic 
valve-in-valve in a degenerated lotus valve. Struct 
Heart. 2024;8:100229. 
5. Khan 
JM, 
Bruce 
CG, 
Babaliaros 
VC, 
Greenbaum AB, Rogers T, Lederman RJ. Tavr 
roulette: caution regarding basilica laceration for 
tavr-in-tavr. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2020;13: 
787–789. 
KEY WORDS BASILICA, complication, 
electrosurgery, Evolut, Lotus, TAVR 
APPENDIX For supplemental videos, 
please see the online version of this paper. 
Ghoneem et al 
J A C C :  C A S E  R E P O R T S ,  V O L .  3 0 ,  N O .  2 4 ,  2 0 2 5  
First-in-Human Report of BASILICA to Facilitate ViV TAVR Inside a Degenerated Lotus Valve 
A U G U S T  2 0 ,  2 0 2 5 : 1 0 4 6 6 9  
6 
