
=== PAGE 1 ===
CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS
CLINICAL CASE
Left Ventricle Wire Loss During TAVR
How to Solve it Through Antegrade and Retrograde Approach
Clara Fernández-Cordón, MD, Mario García-Gómez, MD, Akash Jain, MD, Marcelo Rodríguez, MD,
Ana M. Serrador Frutos, MD, Alberto Campo Prieto, MD, Carlos Cortés, MD, PHD, Sara Blasco-Turrión, MD,
J. Alberto San Román, MD, PHD, Ignacio J. Amat-Santos, MD, PHD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Wire loss during transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) can be troublesome.
CASE SUMMARY An 88-year-old man with aortic stenosis underwent transfemoral TAVR with a nonretrievable device.
During valve insertion, the extra support wire was withdrawn from the left ventricle (LV). Attempts to recross the valve
were unsuccessful. The authors performed a transseptal puncture and used a steerable introducer to cross the aortic
valve antegradely with a hydrophilic wire, which was externalized to form an arteriovenous loop. A folded Balance
Heavyweight wire (Abbott Vascular) was used to snare the delivery system wire into the LV and deploy the valve.
DISCUSSION Our case exempliﬁes several challenges that may occur during TAVR, including wire loss, and how to
solve them.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Attention must be paid to avoid LV wire loss during TAVR. Transseptal puncture with an
arteriovenous loop and snaring can be used for bailout when other techniques are unsuitable or have failed. (JACC Case Rep.
2025;30:103758) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 88-year-old man was followed at our clinic because
of severe aortic stenosis, which became symptomatic
with angina and dyspnea on exertion.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
Previous medical background included cardiovascu-
lar risk factors and mild chronic kidney disease.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Attention must be paid to avoid left ventricle
wire loss during the transcatheter aortic
valve replacement procedure, especially
when using a nonretrievable device.
 Transseptal puncture with an arteriovenous
loop and snaring of the wire from the delivery
system can be used for bailout when other
techniques are unsuitable or have failed.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103758
From the Interventional Cardiology Unit, Cardiology Department, Heart Sciences Institute (ICICOR), Clinical University Hospital,
Valladolid, Spain.
This study was presented at TCT 2024, October 27-30, 2024, Washington, DC, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received November 15, 2024; revised manuscript received January 14, 2025, accepted January 22, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Symptoms of angina and dyspnea could be
due
to
known
severe
aortic
stenosis,
although coronary artery disease should be
ruled out.
INVESTIGATIONS
The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm
and
left
bundle
branch
block.
The
transthoracic
echocardiogram
displayed
a
severely
calciﬁed
tricuspid aortic valve (mean gradient: 43 mm Hg;
aortic valve area: 0.8 cm2) and normal ejection frac-
tion. The coronary angiogram demonstrated severe
lesions in the proximal left anterior descending artery
and obtuse marginal branch.
MANAGEMENT
The case was discussed by the heart team, and we
decided to pursue percutaneous treatment. Before-
hand, the patient underwent successful percutaneous
coronary intervention.
Cardiac computed tomography was performed for
transcatheter aortic valve (TAV) replacement (TAVR)
planning (Figure 1), showing a severely calciﬁed valve
(4,673 AU), with an aortic annulus area of 453 mm2,
and
severe
calciﬁcation
of
the
descending
aorta
and
iliofemoral
axis.
The
left
subclavian
artery
(the main alternative access used in our center) was
nonfeasible.
The TAVR procedure was performed electively
under conscious sedation. The valve of choice was the
25-mm Acurate neo2 valve (Boston Scientiﬁc). The
right femoral artery was the main access site, and the
left radial artery was used for angiographic control.
We advanced an 0.035-inch J wire to the descending
aorta and performed vascular lithotripsy with a 6-mm
balloon (Shockwave Medical) on the right iliofemoral
arteries,
with
adequate
expansion
(Figure
2).
A
straight 0.035-inch wire and 6-F AL1 catheter (Cordis)
were used to cross the stenotic aortic valve, and we
decided to place a Lunderquist extra-stiff wire (Cook
Medical) in the left ventricle (LV) to provide extra
support at the access site. We then inserted the 14-F
iSleeve TAV expandable introducer sheath (Boston
Scientiﬁc)
and
predilated
with
a
23-mm
balloon
(Figure 3). Despite vascular lithotripsy and the extra-
stiff wire, advancing the delivery system inside the
expandable introducer and through the iliac artery
was extremely difﬁcult, and the Lunderquist wire was
accidentally withdrawn from the LV. Because of its
design with free cells for coronary alignment, once
the Acurate neo2 valve is out of the introducer, it
cannot be retrieved, as this would mean the need for
surgical extraction and femoral artery repair. We
could still implant the valve in the descending aorta,
but this would imply advancing a second valve
through the iliofemoral artery, besides the additional
costs. Of note, the recently launched new iteration of
Acurate (Acurate Prime) does not have free cells.
To solve the situation, we ﬁrst removed the Lun-
derquist wire and attempted to recross the aortic
valve with several other wires from the delivery sys-
tem. However, all efforts were unsuccessful.
We performed a transseptal puncture from the left
femoral vein, with the intention to recapture the de-
livery system wire with a snare from the antegrade
approach (Figure 4). Through the transseptal punc-
ture, we used several catheter shapes (JR 4 and MI) to
VISUAL SUMMARY
Timeline of the Case
Timeline
Events
Day 0
88-year-old man with previously asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis presented to the clinic with dyspnea and angina on
exertion, NYHA functional class III
Day 7
Invasive coronary angiography: severe lesions in the left anterior descending artery and obtuse marginal branch
Day 8
Heart team decision: percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) followed by transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
Day 12
Cardiac computed tomography for TAVR planning
Annulus dimension suitable for the 25-mm Acurate neo 2 valve
Day 14
PCI with implantation of 2 drug-eluting stents
Day 28 (0) – 11 AM
Elective TAVR under conscious sedation
Vascular lithotripsy of the main access (right iliofemoral artery)
Complete accidental withdrawal of the Lunderquist wire from the left ventricle (LV) during delivery system advancement
Transseptal puncture and arteriovenous loop (from the left femoral vein to the left radial artery)
Delivery system wire snaring with a 300-cm folded Balance Heavyweight wire
TAVR deployment underexpansion solved with 23-mm balloon postdilatation
Day 28 (0) – 3 PM
Cardiac tamponade requiring urgent pericardiocentesis and hemodynamic stabilization afterward
Day 30 (þ2)
Pericardial catheter withdrawal
Day 37 (þ9)
Discharge home
6-mo follow-up
Asymptomatic, NYHA functional class I
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
BHW = Balance Heavyweight
LV = left ventricle
MP = multipurpose
TAV = transcatheter aortic
valve
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Fernández-Cordón et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 5
Left Ventricle Wire Loss During TAVR
J U N E 1 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 7 5 8
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
advance a 400-cm hydrophilic wire into the LV and
ascending aorta, without success. Finally, an Agilis
8.5-F
steerable
introducer
(Abbott
Vascular)
was
placed, enabling to direct the hydrophilic Glidewire
(Terumo Interventional Systems). However, we could
not advance any catheter into the ascending aorta
after the Terumo wire, as it did not provide enough
support and kept falling back to the LV.
Through the left radial artery, we used the one-
loop EN Snare catheter (Merit Medical) to capture
the Terumo wire in the aortic arch and externalize it.
We tensed the arteriovenous loop and advanced a 6-F
diagnostic
multipurpose
(MP)
catheter
(the
only
125-cm catheter available) to the ascending aorta after
the Terumo wire. Our plan was to use the same EN
Snare catheter through the transseptal MP catheter to
FIGURE 1
Cardiac Computed Tomography for TAVR Planning
(A) Aortic annulus dimensions. (B) Coronary height. (C) Femoral access. L ¼ left; LC ¼ left coronary sinus; NC ¼ non-coronary sinus; R ¼ right;
RC ¼ right coronary sinus; TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 5
Fernández-Cordón et al
J U N E 1 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 7 5 8
Left Ventricle Wire Loss During TAVR
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
capture the delivery system wire. However, the EN
Snare catheter would not ﬁt into the MP catheter
without removing the hydrophilic wire that was
holding the loop, and it was also not long enough
(120 cm vs 125 cm of the MP catheter’s length). We
solved this by bending a 300-cm 0.014-inch Balance
Heavyweight (BHW) wire (Abbott Vascular) that was
used as a homemade snare to capture a 0.035-inch J
wire from the delivery system, pull it into the LV, and
advance the TAV into the aortic annulus. The Acurate
neo2 M valve was then deployed, showing severe
underexpansion.
At
this
point,
we
could
easily
recross the valve retrogradely from the right femoral
artery, place a Safari wire in the LV, and perform
postdilatation with a 23-mm balloon, with good TAV
expansion and trivial paravalvular leak (Figure 5,
Table 1, Video 1).
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
After
transfer
to
the
acute
cardiovascular
care
unit, the patient became unstable, and a bedside
echocardiogram conﬁrmed severe pericardial effu-
sion and cardiac tamponade. He underwent urgent
FIGURE 2
Vascular Lithotripsy
(A and B) Shockwave balloon 6  60 mm. (C) Balloon rupture due to severe iliac calciﬁcation.
FIGURE 3
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
(A) Severe calciﬁcation of the aortic valve (arrows). (B) Predilatation with a 23-mm balloon.
Fernández-Cordón et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 5
Left Ventricle Wire Loss During TAVR
J U N E 1 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 7 5 8
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
pericardiocentesis,
anticoagulation
reversal,
and
blood
transfusion,
with
immediate
hemodynamic
improvement and adequate bleeding control. We are
uncertain of the exact source of the cardiac tampo-
nade. The patient had a favorable clinical course af-
terward,
with
no
conduction
abnormalities
or
vascular
complications,
and
could
be
discharged
home. The predischarge echocardiogram showed a
mean TAV gradient of 8 mm Hg and no leak.
DISCUSSION
Wire withdrawal from the LV during TAVR with a
nonretrievable device is an infrequent yet trouble-
some complication. In our case, it was due to the
high
friction
encountered
when
advancing
the
device
through
the
severely
calciﬁed
iliofemoral
anatomy.
Several techniques have been described to solve LV
wire loss, but there are no guideline-endorsed algo-
rithms for management. Trying to recross the aortic
valve with a softer wire is usually the ﬁrst step. Even
after successful recrossing, a soft wire may not allow
to advance the delivery system into the annulus
because of the lack of support and coaxiality. Several
authors have proposed using a conventional or over-
the-wire snare from a different arterial access to
capture the delivery system tip or wire and redirect it
into the LV.1-3 A modiﬁcation of this technique using
a microsnare inserted in the delivery system has also
been reported.4 However, in all these cases, the TAV
involved was the balloon-expandable Sapien device
(Edwards Lifesciences), which has a shorter frame
and allows ﬂexing of the delivery system. Transseptal
puncture and snaring of the wire from the antegrade
approach is a feasible although more invasive bailout
FIGURE 4
Transseptal Access Technique to Solve Wire Loss
(A) Agilis steerable introducer through the transseptal access. (B) Terumo wire (400 cm) advanced into the aortic arch. (C) Pigtail catheter removed and Terumo wire
externalized through the left radial artery (arrow). (D) Multipurpose catheter (6-F) advanced along the Terumo wire. (E) Folded Balance Heavyweight (BHW) wire
snaring a J wire from the delivery system. (F) Details of the folded BHW wire.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 5
Fernández-Cordón et al
J U N E 1 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 7 5 8
Left Ventricle Wire Loss During TAVR
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
FIGURE 5
Valve Implantation While Holding the Delivery System From Transeptal Access, and Post-Dilation
(A) Valve deployment. (B) Severe underexpansion. (C) Retrograde valve recrossing and postdilatation with a 23-mm balloon over a Safari wire.
(D) Final result.
TABLE 1
Equipment List
Access

Doppler ultrasound machine

Needle, 0.035- inch J wire, 6-F femoral introducer

2 Perclose ProStyle (Abbott Vascular)

11-F femoral introducer

6  60 mm vascular lithotripsy balloon (Shockwave Medical)

14-F iSleeve expandable introducer sheath (Boston Scientiﬁc)
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement

0.035- inch straight wire and 6-F AL1 catheter (Cordis)

Lunderquist extra support wire (Cook Medical)

23-mm Mammoth valvuloplasty balloon for pre- and postdilatation (Meril Life Sciences)

25-mm Acurate neo2 valve and delivery system (Boston Scientiﬁc)

Safari S stiff wire (Boston Scientiﬁc)
Transseptal puncture and snaring of the
delivery system

SL0 transseptal sheath (St Jude Medical)

BRK1 transseptal needle (Abbott Vascular)

8.5-F Agilis NxT steerable introducer sheath (Abbott Vascular)

400-cm 0.035- inch hydrophilic Glidewire (Terumo Interventional Systems)

125-cm 6-F multipurpose catheter (Cordis)

One-loop EN Snare catheter (Merit Medical)

Folded 300-cm 0.014-inch Balance Heavyweight wire (Abbott Vascular)
Optional

Transesophageal echocardiography, if available, to guide transseptal puncture

Sentinel Cerebral Protection System (Boston Scientiﬁc) for stroke prevention
Fernández-Cordón et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 5
Left Ventricle Wire Loss During TAVR
J U N E 1 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 7 5 8
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
strategy, which has been used in the setting of wire
loss with self-expandable devices such as the Acurate
neo2 valve.5
In our case, even after transseptal puncture we
faced additional challenges to antegradely cross the
aortic valve, requiring a steerable introducer with a
telescoped
long
diagnostic
catheter
inside.
This
catheter subsequently prevented the use of a con-
ventional snare, and we show how a folded BHW wire
can be used instead, with the advantages of lower
proﬁle and longer length. Our case illustrates how the
knowledge of possible bailout techniques and how to
modify them according to patient features and the
available material can be key to a successful proced-
ure. In conclusion, this case highlights the impor-
tance to closely monitor the patient after a complex
procedure to identify and treat life-threatening com-
plications that may arise.
CONCLUSIONS
Transseptal puncture with an arteriovenous loop
and snaring of the delivery system wire with a
folded BHW wire is a feasible bailout option for
accidental
wire
loss
during
nonretrievable
valve
TAVR.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Dr Amat-Santos is a proctor for Boston Scientiﬁc. All other authors
have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the con-
tents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Ignacio J.
Amat-Santos, Cardiology Ramon y Cajal, Instituto de
Ciencias del Corazón, Hospital Clínico, Universitario
de Valladolid, 3 Valladolid, Valladolid 47005, Spain.
E-mail: ijamat@gmail.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Dall’Ara G, Moretti C, Marrozzini C, et al. How
should I treat an unexpected deadlock at the time
of transcatheter aortic valve prosthesis implanta-
tion? EuroIntervention. 2017;13(2):e256–e258.
2. Tanaka A, Nakamura M, Aoyama H, Kametani R.
Novel TSURECOMI bailout technique for trans-
catheter heart valve implantation after accidental
wire withdrawal during TAVR. JACC Case Rep.
2021;3(10):1297–1302.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jaccas.2021.06.017
3. Tsuda M, Egami Y, Kawanami S, Nishino M.
Simple bailout technique using a snare catheter for
wire
withdrawal
during
balloon-expandable
transcatheter aortic valve implantation: a case
report. Eur Heart J Case Rep. 2023;7(9):ytad417.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjcr/ytad417
4. Kampaktsis PN, Basman C, Yoon SH, et al.
A microsnare technique for transcatheter heart
valve recrossing after inadvertent wire withdrawal
from
left
ventricle.
JACC
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2024;17(20):2448–2449. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcin.2024.08.043
5. Cubero-Gallego H, Avanzas P, Moris C. Guide-
wire
lost
during
the
deployment
of
a
nonretrievable transcatheter aortic valve pros-
thesis: a nightmare solution. JACC Cardiovasc
Interv.
2020;13(3):e23–e24.
https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jcin.2019.10.029
KEY WORDS aortic valve, complication,
valve replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 5 , 2 0 2 5
Fernández-Cordón et al
J U N E 1 8 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 7 5 8
Left Ventricle Wire Loss During TAVR
7
