
=== PAGE 1 ===
CASE REPORT
CLINICAL CASE
Progression of Paravalvular Leak and
Hemolytic Anemia After Implantation of
Fifth-Generation Balloon-Expandable
Transcatheter Heart Valve
Nozomu Kanehama, MD, Ryo Ninomiya, MD, PHD, Kengo Tosaka, MD, PHD, Yoshifumi Nakajima, MD,
Tetsuya Fusazaki, MD, PHD, Yoshihiro Morino, MD, PHD
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Progression of paravalvular leak (PVL) and hemolytic anemia are rare complications of newer-
generation transcatheter heart valves used for transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
CASE SUMMARY An 81-year-old man presented with worsening shortness of breath 1 month after implantation of
SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA (S3UR). Echocardiography revealed PVL progression and blood tests indicated hemolytic anemia.
Percutaneous plug closure was successfully performed, reducing the PVL. His symptoms and hemolytic anemia improved.
DISCUSSION The progression of PVL and hemolytic anemia in patients with S3UR has not been previously reported, and
their mechanisms require further investigation. Percutaneous plug closure is a good treatment option for PVL after
transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE This case demonstrates that PVL progression and hemolytic anemia remain a potential
risk after S3UR implantation, which can effectively be treated through percutaneous plug closure. (JACC Case Rep.
2025;30:103410) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An 81-year-old man visited the outpatient clinic
complaining of worsening shortness of breath on
exertion
1
month
after
undergoing
transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR). The patient’s blood
pressure was 132/62 mm Hg, and his heart rate was
85
beats/min
with
a
regularly
irregular
rhythm.
A diastolic murmur (Levine grade 2/6) was detected in
the third left sternal border.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 This case demonstrates the potential risk of
PVL progression and hemolytic anemia
following S3UR implantation, which has not
been previously reported.
 Percutaneous
plug
closure
is
a
suitable
treatment option for these complications.
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103410
From the Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Yahaba, Iwate, Japan.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received June 10, 2024; revised manuscript received January 8, 2025, accepted January 22, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had severe aortic stenosis with
shortness of breath and was scheduled to
undergo TAVR because of older age and mild
frailty.
His
medical
history
included
the
presence of hypertension. Preoperative eval-
uation revealed 2-vessel coronary artery dis-
ease and severe stenosis of the right internal
carotid artery. Computed tomography (CT)
imaging is shown in Video 1 and measure-
ments of the aortic valve complex are shown
in Figure 1. The annulus area was 428 mm2.
Although this was borderline between 23 and
26 mm for SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA (S3UR), a smaller 23-
mm valve was selected to avoid the risk of the annular
rupture. TAVR was performed through the trans-
femoral approach, and a 23-mm S3UR was implanted at
a
nominal
volume.
Post-dilatation
was
added
with þ1 mL because of a residual paravalvular leak
(PVL). The PVL was reduced to mild grade (Videos 2
and 3), and the procedure was completed without
complications. The patient was discharged with mild
PVL
on
transthoracic
echocardiography
(TTE)
(Figure 2A).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The following diagnoses were considered possible
causes of shortness of breath: acute heart failure,
arrhythmia, or prosthetic valve dysfunction (deteri-
oration of valve leaﬂets, leaﬂet thrombosis, PVL).
INVESTIGATIONS
Blood tests showed no change in the N-terminal pro-
hormone of brain natriuretic peptide, but progression
of anemia with an intravascular hemolytic pattern
(elevated lactate dehydrogenase and reticulocytes,
decreased haptoglobin, and presence of schistocytes)
was evident. Electrocardiography revealed bigeminy
with premature atrial contraction. TTE showed wors-
ening PVL, which had progressed to moderate grade
(Figures 2B and 2C). However, the valve leaﬂet motion
was good, and there was no transvalvular regurgita-
tion. Transesophageal echocardiography also showed
exacerbated PVL compared with that of postoperative
echocardiography (Video 4). CT showed no thrombus
at the leaﬂets of the transcatheter heart valve (THV),
but there were 2 gaps between the THV and the cusps
of the sinus of Valsalva (SOV) (Figure 2D, Video 5). The
FIGURE 1
Computed Tomography Measurements of the Aortic Valve Complex Before Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement
(A) Annulus. (B) Sinus of Valsalva. (C) Sinotubular junction. (D) Left ventricular outﬂow tract.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CT = computed tomography
PVL = paravalvular leak
S3 = SAPIEN 3
S3UR = SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA
SOV = sinus of Valsalva
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
THV = transcatheter heart
valve
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiography
Kanehama et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
PVL and Hemolytic Anemia Post S3UR Implant
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 4 1 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
gap between left and right coronary cusps was larger
and was considered the main cause of hemolysis. The
gap measured 2.4  5.8 mm (aortic side), 7.4  3.4 mm
(mid portion), and 10.6  2.5 mm (left ventricular side)
(Figure 3).
MANAGEMENT
The symptoms and hemolytic anemia of the patient
did
not
improve
with
conservative
treatment;
therefore, an
invasive
intervention
was
decided.
Given his advanced age, mild frailty, and severe
stenosis of the right internal carotid artery, he was
considered at high risk for open heart surgery, and
percutaneous PVL closure was performed. The pro-
cedure was performed under general anesthesia,
transesophageal echocardiography guidance, and a
transfemoral approach. The gap between left and
right coronary cusps was crossed with a 0.035-inch
hydrophilic guidewire with a 5-F guiding sheath
and a 4-F Amplatz-Left-2 catheter (Figure 4A). The
guidewire was exchanged with the Safari XS (Bos-
ton). The 5-F guiding sheath did not pass through
the gap and was replaced with a 6-F straight cath-
eter (Figure 4B). This catheter was passed through
the gap, and an 8  7-mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug
II (Abbott Cardiovascular) was successfully implan-
ted (Figure 4C). The PVL was reduced to mild grade
(Figures 4D and 4E, Video 6).
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
Following
percutaneous
PVL
closure,
PVL
was
reduced
from
moderate
to
mild
grade,
and
the
FIGURE 2
Progression of Pravalvular Leak
(A) Transthoracic echocardiography at discharge. Paravalvular leak was mild. (B and C) Transthoracic echocardiography at 1 month (B: long-
axis view, C: short-axis view). Paravalvular leak progressed to moderate. Main paravalvular leak originated from 1 o’clock position between
left and right coronary cusps. (D) Computed tomography showed the gap between left and right coronary cusps (red arrow).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Kanehama et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 4 1 0
PVL and Hemolytic Anemia Post S3UR Implant
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
hemolytic anemia improved, with subsequent disap-
pearance of symptoms.
DISCUSSION
Although PVL after TAVR has been associated with
poor prognosis, it has been mitigated by recent im-
provements in the outer skirt of THV. In the SAPIEN 3
(S3), a previous model of the balloon-expandable
valves, only 1.4% had moderate or severe PVL at
1 month.1 The outer skirt of the S3UR was further
improved by changing the material to textured poly-
ethylene terephthalate and increasing the height by
40% compared with that of the S3, which is expected
to reduce the PVL. In this case, PVL was mild imme-
diately after THV implantation and at discharge but
progressed to moderate 1 month later, resulting in
clinically signiﬁcant hemolytic anemia. Such a clinical
course is uncommon and the underlying mechanisms
require further veriﬁcation.
First, there was a possibility of THV recoil, but in this
case, the stent frame diameter measured by ﬂuoro-
scopic imaging did not change immediately after the
TAVR or during PVL closure. However, because it was
not compared with CT imaging, accurate evaluation of
the recoil was not possible. Second, underexpansion of
the THV might have occurred. In this case, it was
expanded by þ1 mL. Considering the presence of re-
sidual PVL and the sufﬁcient space in the SOV, further
expansion by þ2 mL or þ3 mL might have been feasible.
Third, the selected THV was relatively undersized
compared with the size of the aortic valve complex.
Although the annulus area of this case was 428 mm2,
which was borderline between a 23- and 26-mm S3UR,
the mean SOV diameter was 34.4 mm and the mean
sinotubular junction diameter was 27.6 mm. Consid-
ering the size of the SOV and sinotubular junction, a 26-
mm THV might have been more appropriate. However,
the annular oversizing was 21%, increasing the risk of
annular rupture. Therefore, we selected a 23-mm THV
FIGURE 3
Three-Dimensional Anatomy of Gap
(A) Three-dimensional positioning of native aortic valve and transcatheter heart valve. Stent frame of transcatheter heart valve is illustrated in
green. (B) Aortic side (level of blue line). (C) Mid portion (level of red line). (D) Left ventricular side (level of yellow line).
Kanehama et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
PVL and Hemolytic Anemia Post S3UR Implant
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 4 1 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
for this case, but it was undersized compared with the
SOV diameter, resulting in a gap and subsequent PVL
progression with hemolytic anemia. Finally, there
might be concerns regarding the S3UR itself, such as its
new outer skirt. In fact, with the S3, we did not
encounter similar issues in situations like this case.
The new outer skirt was modiﬁed from the S3 to a
textured
polyethylene
terephthalate
resembling
“towel
fabric.”
It
may
have
unexpectedly
and
dynamically changed in the body, resulting in PVL
progression. The change in material may have also
caused unexpected shear stress of the PVL jet, which
may have accelerated hemolysis. However, these are
only speculative and further investigation is needed,
such as to demonstrate the frequency of PVL progres-
sion and hemolysis compared with the S3 in even larger
cohorts or analyzing PVL jets using other imaging
modalities or in vitro experiments.
PVL after TAVR requires an invasive intervention
when refractory heart failure or hemolysis occurs.
Although
the
American
College
of
Cardiology/
American Heart Association guidelines recommend
percutaneous repair of surgical valves for PVL as
Class 2a,2 there are no established guidelines for
PVL after TAVR. Although surgical intervention is
generally considered, percutaneous treatment is an
option for high-risk cases. Reported percutaneous
treatment options for PVL after TAVR include redo
TAVR, balloon valvuloplasty, and plug closure.3 In
this case, the gap to be closed was clearly visible on
the CT, and the plug closure was effective and safe.
As a result, the patient had a favorable clinical
course.
On
the
other
hand,
the
possibility
of
underexpansion
remained
and
performing
addi-
tional balloon valvuloplasty was considered a viable
option.
FIGURE 4
Procedure of Percutaneous Plug Closure
(A) A 0.035-inch hydrophilic guidewire with 5-F guiding sheath and 4-F Amplatz-Left-2 catheter passed the gap. (B) Guidewire was exchanged to Safari XS and 6-F
straight catheter passed the gap. (C) An 8  7-mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug II was implanted. (D) Transesophageal echocardiography of pre-procedure. (E) Trans-
esophageal echocardiography after implantation of vascular plug.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Kanehama et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 4 1 0
PVL and Hemolytic Anemia Post S3UR Implant
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
CONCLUSIONS
Percutaneous closure is an effective treatment option
for controlling PVL and resolving hemolysis in pa-
tients implanted with S3UR. The mechanisms and
pathophysiology of PVL progression and hemolysis
require further investigation.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
This report did not receive any grant from any funding agency in the
public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors. Dr Morino has received
educational grants from Edwards Lifesciences and lecture fees from
Medtronic and Edwards Lifesciences. Dr Ninomiya has received lec-
ture fees from Edwards Lifesciences. Dr Fusazaki has received lecture
fees from Medtronic and is a proctor for Medtronic. Dr Kanehama has
received lecture fees from Edwards Lifesciences. All other authors
have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the con-
tents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS
FOR
CORRESPONDENCE:
Dr
Nozomu
Kanehama, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Iwate Medical University, 2-1-1
Idaidori, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa-gun, Iwate 028-3695,
Japan. E-mail: kanehama@iwate-med.ac.jp.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Nazif TM, Cahill TJ, Daniels D, et al. Real-world
experience with the SAPIEN 3 Ultra transcatheter
heart valve: a propensity-matched analysis from
the
United
States.
Circ
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2021;14(9):e010543.
2. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al.
2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of
patients with valvular heart disease: a report of
the American College of
Cardiology/American
Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice
Guidelines.
J
Am
Coll
Cardiol.
2021;77(4):e25–e197.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jacc.2020.11.018
3. Landes U, Hochstadt A, Manevich L, et al.
Treatment of late paravalvular regurgitation after
transcatheter aortic valve implantation: prog-
nostic implications. Eur Heart J. 2023;44(15):1331–
1339.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, occluder, valve
replacement
APPENDIX For supplemental
videos, please see the online version of this
paper.
VISUAL SUMMARY
Timeline of the Case
Date
Events
Month X-4
81-year-old man underwent TAVR and was implanted 23-mm S3UR. He was discharged with mild PVL on TTE.
Month X-3
He presented with worsening shortness of breath on exertion. TTE showed PVL progression to moderate and blood tests indicated
hemolytic anemia. CT showed 2 gaps between the THV and the cusps of the sinus of Valsalva. The gap between left and right
coronaray cusps was larger and was considered the main cause of hemolysis.
Month X
He was considered at high risk for open heart surgery, and percutaneous PVL closure was performed. An 8  7-mm Amplatzer
Vascular Plug II was successfully implanted. The PVL was reduced to mild grade.
Month Xþ9
The hemolytic anemia and his symptoms resolved. At 9-month follow-up, he was doing well without symptoms. The PVL remained
mild and anemia was not progressing.
CT ¼ computed tomography; PVL ¼ paravalvular leak; S3UR ¼ SAPIEN3 Ultra RESILIA; TAVR ¼ transcatheter aortic valve replacement; THV ¼ transcatheter heart valve;
TTE ¼ transthoracic echocardiography.
Kanehama et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
PVL and Hemolytic Anemia Post S3UR Implant
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 4 1 0
6
