
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE SERIES
Clinical Course After Transcatheter 
Aortic Valve Replacement for Takayasu 
Arteritis–Related Aortic Stenosis
and Regurgitation
Yuki Tadokoro, MD, a Naonori Kawamoto, MD, PHD, a Kizuku Yamashita, MD, PHD, a Takashi Kakuta, MD, PHD, a 
Kensuke Takagi, MD, PHD, b Yasuhide Asaumi, MD, PHD, b Hideaki Kanzaki, MD, PHD, c Chisato Izumi, MD, PHD, c 
Kazuhiro Yamamoto, MD, PHD, d Satsuki Fukushima, MD, PHD a
ABSTRACT
Takayasu arteritis (TAK) is chronic, large-vessel vasculitis that frequently involves the aorta and its major branches, 
often leading to aortic valve disease. Recently, transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has emerged as a less 
invasive alternative for patients with TAK-induced aortic stenosis who are at high risk for conventional surgical aortic 
valve procedures. However, long-term data remain limited. We report the clinical courses of 3 patients with TAK who 
underwent TAVR for aortic stenosis and regurgitation. No major complications were observed during the procedure 
or hospital stay. The mean follow-up duration after TAVR was 5.7 years. During follow-up, 1 patient experienced a 
relapse of TAK that led to low cerebral perfusion, heart failure, and subsequent death 7 years after TAVR. Our 
observations suggest that TAVR may yield acceptable long-term outcomes for high-risk patients with TAK if disease 
activity can be suppressed, thus preventing heart failure or cerebrovascular events. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:105917) 
© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open 
access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
T 
akayasu arteritis (TAK) is often granuloma-
tous and predominantly affects the aorta 
and/or its major branches. 1,2 It is associated 
with a high incidence of aortic regurgitation; approx-
imately 23.6% of patients with TAK in Japan have 
aortic regurgitation. 3 Among these are rare cases of 
patients who present with a combination of aortic 
valve stenosis and regurgitation (ASr).
Aortic valve replacement (AVR) is an option for 
patients who experience symptoms of heart failure
despite medical treatment for TAK. However, it 
poses a risk of postoperative detachment or the 
formation of anastomotic pseudoaneurysms. 4-8 
Although transcatheter AVR (TAVR) may be a better 
alternative than AVR in high-risk patients with 
TAK-related ASr, early and late outcomes of TAVR 
in such patients have not been fully reported. 9,10 
This is the first report to describe the early and late 
clinical course after TAVR for patients with TAK-
related ASr.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.105917
From the a Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan; b Division of Cor-
onary Diseases, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan; c Department of Heart Failure and Transplantation, 
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan; and the d National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Hospital, Suita, 
Japan.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received July 17, 2025; revised manuscript received September 8, 2025, accepted September 17, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
© 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
CASE DESCRIPTIONS
PATIENT 1. A 64-year-old woman with a 
history of hypertension and nephrotic syn-
drome was referred to our hospital for exer-
tional dyspnea. Echocardiography revealed 
moderate aortic stenosis (peak jet velocity: 
3.5 m/s, mean pressure gradient [mPG]: 
24 mm Hg, aortic valve area: 1.01 cm 2 ) and 
severe regurgitation. Computed tomography 
(CT) revealed circumferential aortic calcifi-
cation between the aortic root and the 
descending aorta, left common carotid artery 
occlusion, and circumferential calcification 
of both subclavian arteries and the internal 
thoracic artery (Figure 1).
The diagnosis of TAK was based on the 
Japanese Circulation Society 2017 guideline 
on the management of vasculitis syndrome. 2 How-
ever, inflammatory markers were not elevated, and 
positron emission tomography (PET)-CT revealed no 
vascular uptake. No concomitant autoimmune dis-
eases were identified. Given the absence of disease 
activity, immunosuppressive therapy was not initi-
ated. The patient’s symptoms of heart failure were 
mitigated via diuretic therapy; however, after a dis-
cussion with the heart valve team, the decision was 
made to proceed with TAVR.
After valvuloplasty of the aortic valve with a 
20-mm balloon, TAVR was performed by using a 
23-mm Sapien XT valve (Edwards Lifesciences) via 
a transfemoral approach, and no vascular complica-
tions occurred. Postoperative echocardiography 
revealed no paravalvular leakage or stenosis (peak jet 
velocity: 2.1 m/s, mPG: 10.8 mm Hg, effective orifice 
area [EOA]: 1.5 cm 2 ). The postoperative course was 
uneventful, and the patient was discharged on post-
operative day 7 without immunosuppressive ther-
apy. Single-antiplatelet therapy was initiated on the 
second day after TAVR and continued for 6 months 
postoperatively. No percutaneous coronary inter-
vention procedures were required during follow-up. 
During the >5-year follow-up, echocardiography 
showed no progression of structural valve deterio-
ration (SVD) (peak jet velocity: 3.2 m/s, mPG: 
21 mm Hg, EOA: 1.1 cm 2 ). However, the patient 
experienced prerenal kidney dysfunction and exac-
erbation of her symptoms of cerebral ischemia, 
including dizziness and lightheadedness. Doppler 
ultrasonography revealed stenosis of the right renal 
artery and occlusion of the right external carotid ar-
tery. Based on these observations, she was diagnosed
with a TAK relapse, and corticosteroid therapy with 
45 mg prednisolone was initiated. At the 7-year 
postoperative follow-up, the patient had been tak-
ing 80 mg telmisartan, 80 mg nifedipine, 8 mg tor-
asemide, 40 mg furosemide, 1 mg trichlormethiazide, 
and 2 mg prednisolone. However, her dyspnea had 
worsened, and her B-type natriuretic peptide levels 
had increased to 1,612 pg/mL. An attempt was made 
to intensify the diuretic and cardioprotective medi-
cations; however, her symptoms of cerebral ischemia 
(eg, dizziness and lightheadedness) worsened. 
PET-CT demonstrated an increased uptake in the 
brachiocephalic artery and right common carotid ar-
tery. The patient’s heart failure worsened before 
azathioprine could be initiated to control the disease 
activity, and she experienced cardiac arrest in the 
emergency room. She subsequently developed hyp-
oxic encephalopathy. The patient died 7 years 
3 months after the surgery. Her postoperative course 
and trends in her C-reactive protein level, erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate, white blood cell count, and 
prednisolone dosage after TAVR are illustrated in 
Figure 2.
PATIENT 2. A 70-year-old woman with TAK under-
went coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) at the 
age of 34 for coronary artery stenosis. No concomi-
tant autoimmune diseases were diagnosed in this 
patient. Follow-up echocardiography demonstrated 
progressive worsening of aortic stenosis. Therefore, 
she was referred to our hospital for surgical 
management.
Echocardiography revealed severe aortic stenosis 
(peak jet velocity: 5.1 m/s, mPG: 57 mm Hg, aortic valve 
area: 0.73 cm 2 ) and moderate regurgitation. CT 
revealed circumferential aortic calcification extending
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• TAVR may be a safe and feasible alternative 
to surgical aortic valve replacement in 
patients with Takayasu arteritis (TAK) with 
extensive aortic calcification or high 
surgical risk.
• Avoiding aortic manipulation during TAVR 
may reduce the risk of valve detachment and 
pseudoaneurysm formation. By preventing 
the relapse of TAK with heart failure or ce-
rebrovascular events, TAVR may offer an 
acceptable long-term outcome for patients 
with TAK with aortic stenosis and 
regurgitation.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
ASr = aortic valve stenosis and
regurgitation
AVR = aortic valve
replacement
CABG = coronary artery
bypass grafting
CT = computed tomography
EOA = effective orifice area
mPG = mean pressure gradient
PET = positron emission
tomography
SVD = structural valve
deterioration
TAK = Takayasu arteritis
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
Tadokoro et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr 
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 1 7
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
from the aortic root to the descending and abdominal 
aorta, as well as 50% stenosis of the left common ca-
rotid artery (Figure 3). Myocardial perfusion imaging 
revealed no signs of myocardial ischemia. The disease 
activity of the patient’s TAK had been well controlled
with a maintenance dose of prednisolone (5 mg daily). 
After discussion with the heart valve team, the deci-
sion was made to proceed with TAVR.
TAVR was performed using a 20-mm Sapien 3 
valve (Edwards Lifesciences) via a transfemoral
VISUAL SUMMARY Clinical Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr
ASr = aortic valve stenosis and regurgitation; TAK = Takayasu arteritis; TAVR = transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Tadokoro et al
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 1 7 
Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
approach, and no vascular complications occurred. 
Postoperative echocardiography revealed no note-
worthy paravalvular leakage or SVD (peak jet veloc-
ity: 3.4 m/s, mPG: 26 mm Hg, EOA: 1.02 cm 2 ). The 
postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient 
was discharged on postoperative day 7. The disease 
activity of the patient’s TAK remained stable with the 
maintenance dose of prednisolone (5 mg daily); 
Single-antiplatelet therapy was initiated on the sec-
ond day after TAVR and continued for 6 months 
postoperatively. No percutaneous coronary inter-
vention procedures were required during follow-up. 
At the 5-year postoperative follow-up, PET-CT 
revealed no noteworthy uptake in the major arteries, 
indicating adequate control of TAK. Echocardiography 
revealed elevation of the pressure gradient (peak jet
velocity: 4.4 m/s, mPG: 40 mm Hg, EOA: 1.1 cm 2 ) and 
trivial transvalvular aortic regurgitation. The patient 
remained free of heart failure symptoms and 
continued using enalapril (5 mg) and prednisolone 
(5 mg) (Figure 4).
PATIENT 3. A 68-year-old woman underwent CABG 
at the age of 61 for coronary artery stenosis. She had 
undergone routine follow-up with transthoracic 
echocardiography, which demonstrated progressive 
worsening of aortic stenosis, thus she was referred to 
our hospital for surgical management. 
Echocardiography revealed severe aortic stenosis 
(peak jet velocity: 4.5 m/s, mPG: 82 mm Hg, aortic 
valve area: 0.59 cm 2 ) and moderate regurgitation. CT 
revealed widespread calcified stenoses affecting the 
bilateral common and internal carotid arteries, the 
left subclavian artery, the superior mesenteric artery, 
the left renal artery, and both femoral arteries 
(Figure 5). TAK was diagnosed based on the Japanese 
Circulation Society guideline on the management of 
vasculitis syndrome. 2 However, the patient’s in-
flammatory markers were not elevated, and PET-CT 
revealed no vascular uptake. No concomitant auto-
immune diseases were identified. Given the absence 
of disease activity, immunosuppressive therapy was 
not initiated. After discussion with the heart valve 
team, surgical AVR was considered high risk, and 
transapical TAVR was planned because of peripheral 
artery narrowing.
TAVR was performed using a 23-mm Sapien 3 valve 
via a transapical approach; no bleeding events 
occurred. Postoperative echocardiography revealed 
no paravalvular leakage or SVD (peak jet velocity: 
1.5 m/s, mPG: 5 mm Hg). The postoperative course 
was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on 
postoperative day 7. The disease activity of TAK 
remained stable without immunosuppressive ther-
apy. Post-TAVR treatment consisted solely of single-
antiplatelet therapy for 6 months, without any anti-
coagulants. No percutaneous coronary interventions 
were required during follow-up.
At the 5-year postoperative follow-up, echocardi-
ography showed no noteworthy SVD (peak jet ve-
locity: 2.1 m/s, mPG: 9 mm Hg, EOA: 1.28 cm 2 ). 
Although PET-CT revealed no noteworthy vascular 
uptake, carotid ultrasonography suggested that the 
stenosis had progressed. The patient had not devel-
oped heart failure symptoms by the time of report-
ing, however close follow-up with medical therapy 
was ongoing, including 5 mg carvedilol (Figure 6).
FIGURE 1 Imaging of Patient 1
Computed tomography revealed circumferential aortic calcifi-
cation between the aortic root and the descending aorta, left 
common carotid artery occlusion, and circumferential calcifi-
cation of both subclavian arteries and the internal thoracic 
artery.
Tadokoro et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr 
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 1 7
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
DISCUSSION
This case series demonstrates 3 major points. First, 
TAVR demonstrated safer surgical outcomes, with no 
major complications and shorter hospital stays 
compared with AVR for patients with TAK, even if 
they had a heavily calcified ascending aorta and 
occlusive peripheral arteries. As seen in these 3 pa-
tients, in the presence of severe aortic calcification, 
AVR may pose considerable risks, including aortic 
dissection during aortic cross-clamping, emboliza-
tion of calcified debris leading to stroke, and diffi-
culty in achieving hemostasis during suturing. In 
such cases, TAVR, which avoids direct manipulation 
of the aorta, is a valuable alternative to consider. 
However, in TAK, major arteries are often affected by 
calcification. In the present cases, the transfemoral 
approach was used in 2 patients and the transapical 
approach in the other patient, and no vascular com-
plications were observed. These observations high-
light the importance of careful selection of the access 
routes on a case-by-case basis.
The second point is that late prosthetic valve 
detachment and anastomotic pseudoaneurysms, 
potentially lethal complications after surgical AVR,
are technically improbable events after TAVR. The 
reported incidence of such complications after AVR 
in patients with TAK is 6% to 13%. 4-8 The inflamma-
tion associated with TAK can contribute to prosthetic 
valve detachment and the development of anasto-
motic pseudoaneurysms. 4 Because TAVR does not 
involve aortic manipulation and yields less of an in-
flammatory response than surgical AVR, we were 
surprised that no prosthetic valve instability was 
observed during long-term follow-up.
In 2 of our cases, mild progressive degeneration of 
the prosthetic valve was observed; however, reop-
eration for prosthetic valve degeneration had not 
been required by the time of reporting.
The third point is that well-controlled disease ac-
tivity of TAK may be favorable for long-term survival 
after TAVR. The 2 patients in this study with 
controlled disease activity of TAK survived beyond 
5 years without symptoms of heart failure or cere-
brovascular events. However, patient 1, who had a 
TAK relapse, experienced symptoms of heart failure. 
Although her medical therapy was initially escalated, 
it eventually had to be discontinued because of 
impaired cerebral perfusion. Yamashita et al 10 re-
ported the surgical outcomes after TAVR and CABG in
FIGURE 2 Postoperative Course of Patient 1
Trends in C-reactive protein (CRP) level, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), white blood cell (WBC) count, and prednisolone (PSL) dosage 
after transcatheter aortic valve replacement. The patient experienced a relapse of Takayasu arteritis (TAK) at approximately day 1,500, with 
the subsequent reintroduction of PSL. Moderate aortic regurgitation (AR) developed, and the patient died 7 years 3 months postoperatively.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Tadokoro et al
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 1 7 
Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
a patient with TAK. That patient died 7 years later 
from impaired cerebral perfusion due to uncon-
trolled disease activity despite receiving immuno-
suppressive 
therapy 
with 
prednisolone 
and 
tocilizumab along with cardioprotective medica-
tions. Considering the severe calcification of the 
thoracic aortic wall, the feasibility of performing 
TAVR-in-TAVR in future, and the potential for 
coronary events, we opted for the Edwards Sapien 
series of valves in all 3 of our cases.
Taken together, TAVR may yield acceptable long-
term outcomes in high-risk patients with TAK if 
the disease activity can be suppressed, thereby
preventing heart failure or cerebrovascular events. 
After TAVR in patients with TAK with ASr, cerebro-
vascular assessments and echocardiography should 
be incorporated into regular checkups.
CONCLUSIONS
In terms of procedural safety and postoperative he-
modynamics, TAVR may be a viable alternative to 
surgical AVR for patients with TAK, particularly for 
those with extensive aortic calcification or a high 
surgical risk. Better long-term clinical outcomes may 
depend on the adequate control of TAK disease
FIGURE 3 Imaging of Patient 2
(A) Computed tomography revealed circumferential aortic calcification extending from the aortic root to the descending and abdominal 
aorta, as well as 50% stenosis of the left common carotid artery. (B) Coronary computed tomography angiography revealed patency of the 
saphenous vein graph (SVG) in the obtuse marginal branch, whereas the SVG in the left anterior descending artery was occluded (yellow 
arrow).
Tadokoro et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr 
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 1 7
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
FIGURE 4 Postoperative Course of Patient 2
Trends in C-reactive protein (CRP) level, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), white blood cell (WBC) count, and prednisolone (PSL) dosage 
after transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Inflammatory markers remained stable under low-dose PSL, with no evidence of Takayasu 
arteritis relapse throughout the follow-up period.
FIGURE 5 Imaging of Patient 3
Computed tomography revealed widespread calcified stenoses affecting (A and B) the bilateral common and internal carotid arteries, (C) left 
subclavian artery (red arrow), and (D) superior mesenteric artery. (E) Coronary computed tomography angiography revealed the patency of 
the left internal thoracic artery graft in the left anterior descending and posterolateral branches.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5 
Tadokoro et al
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 1 7 
Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
activity, which suggests that the careful monitoring 
of disease activity as well as cerebrovascular evalu-
ations are essential during follow-up.
DATA AVAILABILITY. The data used in this study 
will be shared upon reasonable request to the corre-
sponding author with permission from the ethics 
committee.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Editage for 
the English language editing.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
Institutional review board number: M30-026-10. The authors have 
reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of 
this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Naonori
Kawamoto, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, 
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, 6-1 
Kishibe-Shimmachi, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan. 
E-mail: kawamoto.naonori@ncvc.go.jp.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. 2012 
revised international chapel hill consensus con-
ference nomenclature of vasculitides. Arthritis 
Rheum. 2013;65:1–11.
2. Isobe M, Amano K, Arimura Y, et al. JCS 2017 
guideline on management of vasculitis syndrome 
– digest version. Circ J. 2020;84:299–359.
3. Yoshifuji H, Nakaoka Y, Uchida HA, et al. Organ 
damage and quality of life in Takayasu arteritis - 
evidence from a national registry analysis. Circ J. 
2024;88:285–294.
4. Fath AR, Mookadam F, Aglan A, et al. Surgical 
management of aortic regurgitation in Takayasu’s 
arteritis: a systematic review of techniques and 
outcomes. Perm J. 2022;26:103–113.
5. Matsuura K, Ogino H, Kobayashi J, et al. Sur-
gical treatment of aortic regurgitation due to 
Takayasu arteritis: long-term morbidity and mor-
tality. Circulation. 2005;112:3707–3712.
6. Nam SH, Park J, Hong S, et al. Long-term 
outcomes and prognostic factors after aortic 
valve surgery in patients with Takayasu 
arteritis. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2023;71: 
375–383.
7. Ergi DG, Schaff HV, Pochettino A, et al. Out-
comes of aortic surgery in patients with Takayasu 
arteritis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2025;169:576– 
583.
8. Zhang Y, Fan P, Zhang H, et al. Surgical treat-
ment in patients with aortic regurgitation due to
Takayasu arteritis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2020;110: 
165–171.
9. Chen J, Lu Y, Yang Y, et al. Transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement for aortic regurgitation caused 
by Takayasu arteritis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2022;114: 
e145–e148.
10. Yamashita K, Kobayashi J, Fujita T, et al. 
Simultaneous transcatheter aortic valve implan-
tation and off-pump coronary artery bypass 
grafting for Takayasu arteritis. J Cardiol Cases. 
2017;15:158–160.
KEY WORDS aortitis, Takayasu arteritis, 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement
FIGURE 6 Postoperative Course of Patient 3
Trends in C-reactive protein (CRP) level, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and white blood cell (WBC) count after transcatheter aortic 
valve replacement. CRP levels remained low during follow-up, whereas the ESR fluctuated mildly.
Tadokoro et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 4 1 , 2 0 2 5
Course After TAVR for TAK-Related ASr 
D E C E M B E R 1 7 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 5 9 1 7
8
