
=== PAGE 1 ===
CRITICAL CARE AND RESUSCITATION
CLINICAL CASE
Valve-in-Valve TAVR Complicated by
Left Main Coronary Obstruction Salvaged
by Left Atrial VA-ECMO
Hafez Golzarian, DO,a,b Abdelrahman Osman, BS,c Anna C. Kleman, RN,d Mallory Knous, RN,d
Janelle M. Fields, RT(R)CI,d Andrew H. Macke, RT(R)(CV),d Emily Shappell, CCP,d Amanda D. Laird, CNP,e
William C. Cole, MD,e John Sirak, MD,f Sandeep M. Patel, MDd
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Coronary artery obstruction (CAO) is a life-threatening complication of valve-in-valve transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR) often necessitating expeditious intervention and hemodynamic support.
CASE SUMMARY We present the case of a patient undergoing valve-in-valve TAVR who endured cardiac arrest
secondary to CAO due to leaﬂet impingement, necessitating immediate venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation support. Subsequent percutaneous coronary intervention using a workhorse guidewire and stent successfully
restored coronary ﬂow.
DISCUSSION We describe an order of operations protocol used at our center for such cases elucidating the logistics and
implementation of the strategy that allowed for successful resuscitation of our patient. The increasing complexity of
TAVR procedures necessitates proceduralists’ familiarity with advanced bailout techniques and multidisciplinary team
approaches to address such critical complications.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE This case highlights the importance of prompt recognition, hemodynamic stabilization with
venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and emergent percutaneous coronary intervention in managing CAO
post-TAVR. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103200) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 78-year-old woman presented for elective valve-in-
valve transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
due to symptomatic severe aortic insufﬁciency (NYHA
functional class III). Vital signs were remarkable for a
widened pulse pressure of 152/33 mm Hg. Physical
examination revealed grade 3 diastolic decrescendo
murmur along the left sternal border with soft second
heart sounds and 3þ pitting edema in lower extrem-
ities bilaterally. She was deemed a high prohibitive
risk for redo surgical valve replacement; therefore,
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2024.103200
From the aInternal Medicine Residency Program, Mercy Health–St. Rita’s Medical Center, Lima, Ohio, USA; bCardiovascular
Disease Fellowship Program, HCA Houston Healthcare-Kingwood/University of Houston College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA; cUniversity of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA; dStructural Heart & Intervention Center, Mercy Health–
St. Rita’s Medical Center, Lima, Ohio, USA; eDepartment of Critical Care, Mercy Health–St. Rita’s Medical Center, Lima, Ohio, USA;
and the fDepartment of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Mercy Health–St. Rita’s Medical Center, Lima, Ohio, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received August 1, 2024; revised manuscript received November 13, 2024, accepted November 19, 2024.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
valve-in-valve
TAVR
was
recommended.
Standard preprocedural computed tomogra-
phy
with
angiography
was
performed.
Coronary heights were approximately 11 mm
(Figure 1). The virtual valve-to-coronary ratio
was 4.3 mm.
No
signiﬁcant
bulky
calciﬁcation
was
noted. Sinus of Valsalva width and heights,
and sinotubular junction measurements were
appropriate (Figure 2) and did not indicate need for
any adjunctive coronary protection strategy (ie, pre-
emptive guide/stent insertion or percutaneous leaﬂet
laceration). She was prepped in sterile fashion and
underwent
a
successful
transfemoral
Medtronic
29-mm Evolut FX prosthesis implantation per stan-
dard protocol. Before release (at 80% deployment),
coronary ﬂow and valve positioning was deemed
appropriate. Post-deployment angiography in multi-
ple
projections
also
conﬁrmed
appropriate
valve
positioning. However, shortly afterward, she became
acutely hypotensive and rapidly deteriorated into
sustained ventricular ﬁbrillation with cardiac arrest.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient had a prior subcoronary stentless surgical
aortic valve replacement (27-mm Medtronic Freestyle
Bioprosthetic) 2 decades prior, chronic kidney dis-
ease, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and coronary
artery disease.
INVESTIGATIONS
Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
was
immediately
initiated. Transthoracic echocardiography immedi-
ately before arrest had revealed a signiﬁcant decline
in left ventricular function with ventricular dilata-
tion. No effusions or signs of tamponade were noted.
At the same time, aortography was quickly per-
formed, revealing a patent right coronary artery.
However, there was subtotal obstruction of the left
coronary artery at the level of the ostium with trace
contrast
ﬂow
conﬁrming
the
diagnosis
of
acute
obstruction of the left main ostium (Figure 3A).
MANAGEMENT
Multiple attempts to engage the left coronary with
various catheters including a Judkins Left-4.0 (Merit
Medical Systems Inc), EBU 3.5 5-F guiding catheter
and EBU 3.75 5-F guiding (Medtronic), and VL-3.5 and
VL-3.75 (Boston Scientiﬁc) were unsuccessful. How-
ever,
the
patient’s
hemodynamics
continued
to
decline. Because a heart team discussion ensued, our
cardiothoracic surgical team was alerted to prep for
emergent surgery. Meanwhile, staff engaged in car-
diopulmonary resuscitation until the patient was
expeditiously placed on percutaneous venoarterial
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO)
support. For cannulation, the TAVR site was used as
the arterial cannula site and was exchanged for a 19-F
arterial cannula. This was followed by placement of a
25-F multistage venous drainage cannula in the left
femoral vein with the tip in the superior vena cava.
Thereafter, a total of 3 episodes of ventricular
ﬁbrillation were promptly identiﬁed and deﬁbrillated
as we continued our attempts to engage the left cor-
onary. Finally, with an Amplatz left 1 guiding catheter
and 0.014 Runthrough NS PTCA Guidewire (Terumo
Interventional Systems), we were able to knuckle the
guidewire through the valve frame and over the
impinged leaﬂet and pass into the left main coronary.
We then passed a Guidezilla II Guide Extension
Catheter (Boston Scientiﬁc) for support and passed
3.0-, 4.0-, and 5.0-mm compliant balloons into the
artery, successfully reestablishing ﬂow (Figure 3B)
and attempted to push the obstructing leaﬂet into the
sinus, but this was not feasible. Although pulsatility
returned,
coronary
patency
was
not
sustainable
despite multiple balloon angioplasties. In the setting
of successful coronary reengagement, a shared heart
team decision was made to stent the ostium with the
proximal portion of the stent protruding proximal to
the valve frame using a 5.0-  15-mm Onyx Frontier
drug-eluting stent, ensuring uninterrupted ﬂow from
the
aorta
(Figure
3C),
rather
than
proceeding
with open heart to avoid further morbidity. Despite
stabilization on VA-ECMO, transesophageal echocar-
diogram revealed signiﬁcant spontaneous echocardi-
ography contrast in the left atrium due to immobile
mitral valve, poor left ventricular function, and sig-
niﬁcant afterload (Figure 4, Video 1).
Therefore, we elected to proceed with transeptal
decompression
strategies
by
upgrading
her
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 To identify coronary artery obstruction as
the etiology of rapid decline in a patient
undergoing transcatheter aortic valve
replacement.
 To
demonstrate
a
feasible
strategy
in
providing timely and efﬁcacious resuscita-
tion in patients with cardiac arrest due to
coronary obstruction.
 To review current guidelines and mitigative
strategies for this life-threatening
complication.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
CAO = coronary artery
obstruction
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
VA-ECMO = venoarterial
extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation
Golzarian et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
ViV-TAVR Complicated by Coronary Obstruction and Cardiac Arrest
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 0 0
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
mechanical circulatory support to left atrial VA-
ECMO using a 21-F Protek Solo transseptal cannula
(LivaNova) placed via the right femoral vein. A
Y-circuit was built, connecting the left atrial and
right atrial drainage cannulas into a single cannula
which
was
connected
into
the
oxygenator
and
pump. A distal perfusion catheter was placed in the
right superior femoral artery in antegrade fashion to
prevent limb ischemia. Thereafter, she was then
managed in the intensive care unit. Serial echocar-
diography throughout her course ensured appropri-
ately
recovering
left
ventricular
function
with
proper valve positioning without any perivalvular
leaks or effusions. By day 5, her cardiogenic shock
had fully resolved. On explantation, she was dis-
charged
to
our
inpatient
rehabilitation
facility
where she successfully completed 1 month of car-
diac
rehabilitation
with
no
cardiopulmonary
or
neurologic limitations to date.
DISCUSSION
With an inpatient mortality rate as high as 50%,
coronary artery obstruction (CAO) remains one of the
most fatal complications of TAVR.1 Any onset of
hypotension minutes, hours, and even days post-
deployment should prompt considerations of this
complication. Risk factors include having low-lying
coronary ostia, large, bulky calciﬁcation of leaﬂets,
narrow
sinotubular
junction,
narrow
diameter
at
the
sinuses
of
Valsalva,
high
implantation,
and
valve-in-valve replacement, among many others. The
risk is 4-fold in females and attributable to the
aforementioned anatomic characteristics. Most cases
(80%-90%) involve the left coronary artery.2
Management may depend on several factors (eg,
timing, etiology, degree of obstruction, type of valve
used).
Due
to
the
rarity
and
morbidity
of
this
complication, salvage strategies are not streamlined
in current practice and are limited to case reports.
Emphasis should be placed on early recognition,
establishment of appropriate cardiopulmonary sup-
port, and emergent percutaneous intervention (if
feasible) or surgery. In our case, although the pre-
procedural
computed
tomography
planning
mea-
surements were adequate for Evolut 29 mm, we
hypothesize that the combination of mild sinotubular
junction calciﬁcation/thickening, rigid degenerative
bioprosthetic leaﬂets, and inner skirt height of the
Evolut prosthesis may have contributed in combina-
tion to sequestration and obstruction of the coronary
artery. In certain cases, self-expanding valves can be
ensnared and repositioned if prior to release, whereas
balloon-expandable valves often require immediate
cannulation and high-pressure balloon angioplasty of
the caged ostium.3 Based on limited data in the
literature,
stent
implantation
seems
to
be
the
preferred and recommended strategy for CAO salvage
with an index success rate of 68.8%, as was per-
formed in our case.1 Emergent surgical revasculari-
zation
should
be
considered
if
percutaneous
intervention is unsuccessful.
FIGURE 1
Coronary and Sinotubular Junction Heights on Preprocedural Computed Tomography Angiography
Blue arrows demonstrate heights of sinotubular junction from basal ring (longer arrows) and the coronary heights measuring roughly 11 mm (shorter arrows). LCC ¼ left
coronary cusp; NCC ¼ noncoronary cusp; RCC ¼ right coronary cusp.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Golzarian et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 0 0
ViV-TAVR Complicated by Coronary Obstruction and Cardiac Arrest
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
As the indications for TAVR continue to expand, an
increasing necessity and complexity of valve re-
placements
and
post-TAVR
percutaneous
in-
terventions
are
anticipated
in
the
near
future.
Proceduralists should familiarize themselves with
technical difﬁculties associated with coronary reen-
gagement and how to overcome these. We recom-
mend having a low threshold for post-deployment
aortography in the setting of clinical concerns or even
to
assess
feasibility
of
coronary
engagement for
future procedures. However, once the diagnosis is
conﬁrmed, hemodynamic stabilization needs to be
the priority because intervention may take time and
cardiac arrest is likely imminent. Therefore, activa-
tion for emergent surgery while proceeding with
emergency VA-ECMO using the TAVR access site is
imperative. Either with perfusion assistance or with
trained
laboratory
personnel,
the
extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation circuit should be prepped
and instituted immediately to allow for patient sta-
bilization and team regrouping to understand the
next strategic steps. In doing so, we are able to ensure
patient
stabilization
regardless
of
the
operator’s
ability to engage the obstructed coronary.
The engagement technique was expectedly chal-
lenging because shorter guides did not allow for
FIGURE 2
Additional Anatomic Measurements on Preprocedural Planning
(A) Annulus dimensions measuring 22.8  26.9 mm. (B) Sinus widths ranging from 30.6 to 32.6 mm. (C) Left ventricular outﬂow tract dimensions
measuring 24.2  28.5 mm. (D) Sinotubular junction diameters of 26.7  29.0 mm. LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract. Other abbreviations as
in Figure 1.
Golzarian et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
ViV-TAVR Complicated by Coronary Obstruction and Cardiac Arrest
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 0 0
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
proper
angulation
and
engagement.
Rather
than
focusing on the coronary ostium, the primary objec-
tive was to locate a space above the impinged leaﬂet,
through which a wire could potentially be introduced.
Although shorter guides are generally preferable, the
speciﬁc case required the use of the combination of
an Amplatz left 1 guide in combination with a work-
horse Runthrough wire with a more oblique angle to
be able to maneuver through the valve struts and
prolapse over the leaﬂet and into the left main
ostium.
Several techniques have been proposed in recent
years to help mitigate the risk of CAO, such as
guidewire
left
main
protection,
snorkel/chimney
stenting, BASILICA (Bioprosthetic or native aortic
scallop intentional laceration to prevent iatrogenic
coronary
artery
obstruction
during
TAVR),
and
snare techniques.3-6 Ongoing studies suggest statis-
tically comparable rates of technical success and
periprocedural complications for both stenting and
BASILICA. However, BASILICA may be favored in the
future because it appears to provide the long-term
advantage of better future reengagement; however,
it is too early to tell. Furthermore, preliminary data
also reveal a cardiovascular mortality of 6.7% associ-
ated with chimney stenting as opposed to 1.3% with
BASILICA. However, the data on these techniques are
limited to small sample sizes, making it extremely
difﬁcult to provide generalizability and true efﬁcacy
FIGURE 3
Aortography Pre and Post Left Main Coronary Artery Salvage
(A) Subtotal obstruction of the left main coronary artery with trace contrast ﬂow in the associated with the white vertical line of the leaﬂet consistent with coronary
artery obstruction. (B) A 4.0 compliant balloon successfully passing into the artery after ﬁnally gaining access with the Amplatz left 1 guide catheter and a 0.014-inch
Runthrough NS PTCA guidewire. (C) Patent left main coronary artery status post implantation of 5.0  15 mm Onyx Frontier drug-eluting stent.
FIGURE 4
Afterload Burden Immediately Post Initiation of
Venoarterial Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) with mid-esophageal
view revealing spontaneous echocardiographic contrast within
left ventricular and atrial cavities on TEE suggesting low blood
ﬂow velocities compounded by signiﬁcant afterload which
prompted conversion to left atrial venoarterial extracoporeal
membrane oxygenation. AMVL ¼ anterior mitral valve leaﬂet;
AV ¼ aortic valve; LA ¼ left atrium; LV ¼ left ventricle;
LVOT ¼ left ventricular outﬂow tract; PMVL ¼ posterior mitral
valve leaﬂet.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Golzarian et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 0 0
ViV-TAVR Complicated by Coronary Obstruction and Cardiac Arrest
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
in preventing CAO, and even these techniques do not
absolve all issues in their entirety. The international
TAVR registry reported left main protection imple-
mentation in nearly one-fourth of patients (23.7%)
who suffered from delayed CAO.1 Furthermore, the
novelty of these strategies can be limiting, requiring
proceduralists to continuously expand their skillset
and practice. Finally, the implantation technique and
type of underlying surgical valve may also affect
patient-prosthesis mismatch and risks of complica-
tions. Despite its advantages, the Freestyle valve is a
stentless prosthesis known to carry an above average
risk of CAO.7
Utilization of VA-ECMO becomes paramount in such
situations and knowing when to upgrade to left atrial
venoarterial extracoporeal membrane oxygenation
requires further understanding of hemodynamics, left
ventricular decompression strategies, circuitry build,
and percutaneous implementations. As more patients
consent for such complex structural interventions,
heart teams should anticipate, plan, and train for such
specialized bailout procedures and management stra-
tegies. Knowing how to prioritize multisystem inter-
ventional issues while delegating team member roles,
optimizing access sites, and ensuring availability of
respiratory and imaging support is often the difference
between
life
and
death
in
these
complex
interventions. At our center, we implement an order of
operations protocol referred to as RAMPS to help guide
multidisciplinary heart teams in the event of post-
TAVR CAO.
Finally, we would be remiss without acknowl-
edging operator fatigue. These cases can be consid-
erably
cumbersome
and
onerous.
Therefore,
we
strongly advocate for thorough utilization of the
entire heart team and other services available to the
proceduralist
(eg,
intensivists,
anesthesiologists,
nurse practitioners, respiratory therapists).
FOLLOW-UP AND OUTCOMES
Our patient is now 12 months post index procedure
and continues to do well with no cardiopulmonary or
neurologic limitations to date.
CONCLUSIONS
Despite
advancements
and
ongoing
attempts
to
streamline mitigative strategies, CAO remains an
inevitable and highly morbid complication of TAVR.
Urgent coronary intervention and hemodynamic me-
chanical support are imperative to promote surviv-
ability. Larger-scale studies on various preventative
and
resuscitative
strategies
are
ongoing
and
VISUAL SUMMARY
RAMPS Protocol: An Order of Operations for Post-Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement Coronary Artery Obstruction
ACLS ¼ adult circulatory life support; ICU ¼ intensive care unit; MCS ¼ mechanical circulatory support; LV ¼ left ventricle; OR ¼ operating room; TAVR ¼ transcatheter
aortic valve replacement; VA-ECMO ¼ venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Golzarian et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
ViV-TAVR Complicated by Coronary Obstruction and Cardiac Arrest
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 0 0
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
necessary to help clinicians better understand the
efﬁcacy,
feasibility,
and
realistic
expectations
in
managing such complications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to ex-
press their deepest gratitude to Denise M. Walker and
Ben Wischmeyer, as well as the Mercy Health - St.
Rita’s Medical Center Department of Graduate Medi-
cal Education and the Structural Heart & Catheteri-
zation
Lab
team
members,
for
their
invaluable
support.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Sandeep M.
Patel, Structural Heart and Intervention Center, St.
Rita’s
Medical
Center
(Mercy),
730
West
Market
Street, 2K Tower, Lima, Ohio 45801, USA. E-mail:
SMPatel@mercy.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Jabbour RJ, Tanaka A, Finkelstein A, et al.
Delayed coronary obstruction after transcatheter
aortic valve replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2018;71(14):1513–1524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jacc.2018.01.066
2. Ribeiro HB, Nombela-Franco L, Urena M, et al.
Coronary
obstruction
following
transcatheter
aortic valve implantation: a systematic review.
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;6:452–461. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcin.2012.11.014
3. Dvir D, Leipsic J, Blanke P, et al. Coronary
obstruction
in
transcatheter
aortic
valve-in-
valve implantation: preprocedural evaluation,
device
selection,
protection,
and
treatment.
Circ
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2015;8(1):e002079.
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.
114.002079
4. Ponangi UP, Yadav S, Kushwaha V, Yadav R,
Lander K, Eng L. Correction of a malpositioned
portico transcatheter aortic valve using a snare
maneuver. JACC Case Rep. 2019;1:838–843.
5. Espinoza Rueda MA, Muratalla González R,
García García JF, et al. Description of the step-
by-step technique with snare catheter for TAVR
in horizontal aorta. JACC Case Rep. 2021;3:1811–
1815.
6. Khan JM, Greenbaum AB, Babaliaros VC, et al.
The
BASILICA
trial:
prospective
multicenter
investigation of intentional leaﬂet laceration to
prevent TAVR coronary obstruction. JACC Car-
diovasc Interv. 2019;12(13):1240–1252.
7. Miller M, Snyder M, Horne BD, et al. Trans-
catheter aortic valve-in-valve replacement for
degenerated stentless bioprosthetic aortic valves:
results of a multicenter retrospective analysis.
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2019;12(13):1217–1226.
KEY WORDS aortic valve replacement,
cardiogenic shock, coronary, hemodynamics,
mechanical circulatory support
APPENDIX For supplemental videos,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 6 , 2 0 2 5
Golzarian et al
M A R C H 1 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 2 0 0
ViV-TAVR Complicated by Coronary Obstruction and Cardiac Arrest
7
