
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Continuous Assessment of
Left Ventricular Outflow Obstruction in 
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation
Yu Ando, MD, a Atsushi Sugiura, MD, PHD, a Masanori Yamamoto, MD, PHD b
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction is a rare but fatal complication after transcatheter 
aortic valve implantation (TAVI). Early detection and timely intervention are essential for favorable clinical outcomes.
CASE SUMMARY We report a case of LVOT obstruction diagnosed and dynamically monitored via a SavvyWire 
(Haemonetics). A 78-year-old woman underwent transfemoral TAVI for severe valve stenosis, and continuous hemo-
dynamic monitoring by the SavvyWire identified a significant aorto–left ventricular pressure gradient with systemic 
hypotension immediately after valve deployment, indicating LVOT obstruction. Prompt administration of intravenous 
fluids and vasopressors resulted in rapid hemodynamic stabilization.
DISCUSSION This case underscores the utility of the SavvyWire for immediate detection and management of dynamic 
LVOT obstruction, potentially improving safety profiles in TAVI procedures.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Continuous monitoring of the aorto–left ventricular pressure gradient can facilitate early 
diagnosis of LVOT obstruction in TAVI procedures. (JACC Case Rep. 2026;31:106523) © 2026 The Authors. Published 
by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the 
CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
D 
ynamic left ventricular outflow tract 
(LVOT) obstruction represents an infre-
quent but potentially life-threatening
complication after transcatheter aortic valve implan-
tation (TAVI) for severe aortic stenosis (AS). Conven-
tional methods often require catheter exchange to 
assess the aorto–left ventricular (LV) pressure 
gradient, limiting continuous intraprocedural moni-
toring capabilities. The SavvyWire (Haemonetics) is
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
• Continuous real-time monitoring of the 
aorto-LV pressure gradient with the Savvy-
Wire during TAVI enables early detection of 
LVOT obstruction.
• Timely volume administration and vaso-
pressor therapy can rapidly reverse dynamic 
LVOT obstruction post-TAVI.
ISSN 2666-0849 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.106523
From the a Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Nagoya Heart Center, Aichi, Japan; and the b Department of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, Toyohashi Heart Center, Aichi, Japan.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ 
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more 
information, visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received September 30, 2025; revised manuscript received November 13, 2025, accepted November 18, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S 
V O L . 3 1 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 6
ª 2 0 2 6 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S I S A N O P E N A C C E S S A R T I C L E U N D E R
T H E C C B Y L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
a next-generation 0.035-inch support wire 
for TAVI that combines LV pacing and real-
time pressure monitoring in a single device. 
It enables simultaneous measurement of 
aortic and LV pressures with high accuracy, 
correlating with standard catheterization 
techniques. 1 Its application during TAVI has 
been validated for safety and efficacy across 
diverse valve anatomies. 2,3 Its main features 
are: 1) simultaneous aorto-LV pressure measurement; 
2) LV pacing capability; 3) enhanced stiffness; and 4) 
extended wire length (280 cm). These features enable 
rapid pacing during valve implantation, simplifying 
the workflow and eliminating the need for a separate 
pacing lead. In addition, they enable continuous 
invasive monitoring of both aortic and left ventricu-
lar pressures throughout the procedure without the 
need for additional catheter manipulation after valve 
deployment.
We present a case in which the SavvyWire identi-
fied a dynamic change in LVOT obstruction immedi-
ately after valve implantation, enabling us to detect 
and manage the LVOT obstruction by applying hy-
dration 
and 
vasopressors 
for 
hemodynamic 
stabilization.
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
A 78-year-old woman presented with fatigue and 
exertional dyspnea. A systolic ejection murmur was 
heard at the left sternal border of the second
intercostal space. Chest x-ray revealed pulmonary 
congestion, leading to a diagnosis of heart failure due 
to AS. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed an 
aortic valve peak velocity of 3.2 m/s, peak pressure 
gradient of 41 mm Hg, and aortic valve area of 
0.62 cm 2 ; it additionally demonstrated a lesional but 
substantial bulge of the septal wall at the level of the 
LVOT, which was observed without signs of blood 
flow acceleration at the LVOT or systolic anterior 
motion of the mitral valve (Video 1). The LV ejection 
fraction was 69%. Electrocardiography showed a 
heart rate of 64 beats/min under normal sinus 
rhythm. Computed tomography exhibited severely 
calcified aortic valves, the aortic annular perimeter at 
75.9 mm, and an annular area of 434 mm 2 . Consistent 
with the echocardiography images, computed to-
mography also demonstrated the bulged basal 
septum, leading to narrowing of the LVOT. The pa-
tient was diagnosed with severe AS.
INVESTIGATIONS, DIFFERENTIAL 
DIAGNOSIS, AND MANAGEMENT
Given the age and comorbidities of the patient, the 
institutional heart team decided to undergo trans-
femoral aortic valve implantation for severe AS. TAVI 
was performed using a SavvyWire for delivery system 
insertion and continuous assessment of LV pressure 
throughout the procedure, while a pigtail catheter 
was placed in the ascending aorta for monitoring 
systemic pressure. Under rapid pacing, a 26-mm
VISUAL SUMMARY Pressure Waveform During TAVI Using the SavvyWire
The SavvyWire is a next-generation guidewire that enables both rapid pacing and continuous real-time aorto-LV pressure monitoring. This 
case report describes a patient who developed dynamic LVOT obstruction immediately after valve implantation, in whom continuous 
assessment of the aorto-LV pressure gradient facilitated prompt diagnosis and treatment. LV = left ventricular; LVOT = left ventricular 
outflow tract; TAVI = transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S 
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AS = aortic stenosis
LV = left ventricle
LVOT = left ventricular
outflow tract
TAVI = transcatheter aortic
valve implantation
Ando et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 6
Continuous Assessment of LVOT Obstruction in TAVI 
F E B R U A R Y 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 5 2 3
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Sapien 3 Ultra Resilia prosthesis (Edwards Life-
sciences) was deployed at the aortic valve, when the 
patient immediately developed substantial hypoten-
sion, with a systemic blood pressure of 67 mm Hg. 
Despite multiple potential for shock after balloon-
expandable 
TAVI, 
continuous 
hemodynamic 
monitoring via the SavvyWire revealed an LVOT 
obstruction, as indicated by the late systolic peaking 
of the LV pressure waveform and marked pressure 
gradient between the LV and ascending aorta of 
41 mm Hg (Figure 1). Therapeutic measures, including 
rapid fluid resuscitation and administration of 
phenylephrine hydrochloride, resulted in prompt 
hemodynamic stabilization and resolution of the 
pressure gradient. Eventually, the peak-to-peak 
aorto-LV pressure gradient completely disappeared, 
confirming the resolution of dynamic LVOT obstruc-
tion (Figure 2). Additionally, other differential di-
agnoses for hypotension, such as cardiac tamponade, 
paravalvular leakage, or coronary obstruction, were 
excluded by echocardiography and angiography.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
During hospitalization, the patient exhibited no signs 
of hemodynamic instability or worsening heart fail-
ure. She was discharged without complications.
DISCUSSION
Dynamic LVOT obstruction is typically caused by an 
acute decline in LV afterload, followed by a hyper-
kinetic LV wall. Although rare, this condition can be 
fatal if timely recognition and intervention are not 
achieved. Most importantly, inotropic agents (eg, 
dobutamine, adrenaline) may worsen the obstruc-
tion. Several factors are known to be associated with 
LVOT obstruction after surgical aortic valve replace-
ment, including LV septal hypertrophy, a sigmoid-
shaped septum, and a narrow LVOT at baseline. 4 
Early recognition is fundamental in the case of LVOT 
obstruction after TAVI.
The SavvyWire provides continuous, real-time 
monitoring of the aorto-LV pressure gradient after
FIGURE 1 Detecting LVOT Obstruction Using Continuous Pressure Monitoring With the SavvyWire During TAVI
(A and B) TTE and CT demonstrating the interventricular septal bulge. (C) All cusps of the aortic valve are severely calcified. (D) TAVI was 
performed, with the prosthesis delivered using the SavvyWire, while continuously monitoring LV pressure. (E) Before valve implantation, 
the SavvyWire showed an elevated LV pressure. Aortic pressure exhibited a lower peak compared to LV pressure, confirming the presence of 
severe aortic stenosis. (F) After valve implantation, a marked drop in aortic pressure was observed, and the SavvyWire revealed a further 
significant increase in LV pressure and a late systolic peaking of the pressure waveform. These findings indicated acute LVOT obstruction. 
CT = computed tomography; LV = left ventricle; LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract; TAVI = transcatheter aortic valve implantation; 
TTE = transthoracic echocardiography.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 6 
Ando et al
F E B R U A R Y 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 5 2 3 
Continuous Assessment of LVOT Obstruction in TAVI
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
valve deployment, facilitating early diagnosis of 
LVOT obstruction or residual pressure gradient 
through the prosthetic valve. It guides diagnostic 
work-up and therapeutic decisions in cases of hypo-
tension after valve implantation. 2 In contrast, con-
ventional techniques necessitate wire exchange for 
pigtail catheter insertion into the LV to measure the 
pressure gradient, which risks hemodynamic insta-
bility. The SavvyWire streamlines this process, 
allowing continuous assessment of pressure gradient 
throughout valve deployment. We also consider that 
evaluating the aorto-LV waveform using the Savvy-
Wire after TAVI may help detect the presence of 
paravalvular leak. However, further studies are war-
ranted to validate its efficacy in assessing aortic 
regurgitation or paravalvular leak after valve 
implantation.
CONCLUSIONS
This case demonstrates the clinical value of real-time 
hemodynamic monitoring using the SavvyWire in
patients undergoing TAVI. Early recognition and
prompt management with volume administration
and vasopressors are critical for hemodynamic sta-
bilization. This report highlights the clinical utility
and safety profile of the SavvyWire, emphasizing its
role in enhancing procedural safety.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Haemo-
netics Corporation for kindly providing reference 
materials and technical information related to the 
SavvyWire system.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant 
to the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Atsushi
Sugiura, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
Nagoya Heart Center, 1-1-14 Sunadabashi, Higashi-
ku, Nagoya, Aichi 461-0045, Japan. E-mail: sssugi@ 
me.com.
FIGURE 2 TAVI Workflow Using the SavvyWire
(A) First, pressure equalization is performed in the ascending aorta. (B) After the stan-
dard TAVI procedure, the SavvyWire is advanced into the LV to allow simultaneous 
measurement of the aorto-LV pressure gradient. (C) Subsequently, rapid pacing is per-
formed using the SavvyWire during valve deployment. (D) Finally, the aorto-LV pres-
sure gradient is reassessed with the SavvyWire for the final evaluation. In cases where 
a residual pressure gradient remains, postdilatation is considered. LV = left ventricle; 
TAVI = transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
Ando et al 
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 6
Continuous Assessment of LVOT Obstruction in TAVI 
F E B R U A R Y 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 5 2 3
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Genéreux P, Kipperman RM, Placido Disla JS, 
et al. Evaluation of the OpSens OptoWire III 
and novel TAVR algorithm to measure pressure 
gradient during TAVR. J Soc Cardiovasc Angiogr 
Interv. 2022;1(4):100309. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jscai.2022.100309
2. Regueiro A, Alperi A, Vilalta V, et al. Safety and 
efficacy of TAVR with a pressure sensor and pac-
ing guidewire: SAFE-TAVI trial. JACC Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2023;16(24):3016–3023. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jcin.2023.10.035
3. Farjat-Pasos JI, Avvedimento M, Rodes-
Cabau J. An evaluation of the SavvyWire as a 
support wire for TAVR procedures. Future Cardiol. 
2025;21(8):579–584. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
14796678.2025.2509458
4. Makhija N, Magoon R, Balakrishnan S, Das S, 
Malik V, Gharde P. Left ventricular outflow 
tract obstruction following aortic valve re-
placement: a review of risk factors, mechanism, 
and management. Ann Card Anaesth. 2019;22(1): 
1–5.
KEY WORDS hemodynamic monitoring, 
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, 
transcatheter aortic valve implantation, 
SavvyWire
APPENDIX For a supplemental
video, please see the online version of 
this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 1 , N O . 7 , 2 0 2 6 
Ando et al
F E B R U A R Y 1 8 , 2 0 2 6 : 1 0 6 5 2 3 
Continuous Assessment of LVOT Obstruction in TAVI
5
