
=== PAGE 1 ===
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CLINICAL CASE
Early TAVR Explantation Due to a
Large Mobile Leaﬂet Mass and
Severe Prosthetic Valve Stenosis
Habib Jabagi, MD,a,b Victor S. Alemany, MD,a Ella Jones,a Himanshu Gupta, MD,c Francis Kim, MD,d Rajiv Tayal, MD,d
Hussein Rahim, MD,d Paul Burns, MD,a Juan Grau, MDa
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a common treatment for aortic stenosis (AS).
Although it is generally safe, its rising use has led to increased device failures and complications requiring surgery. Data
on surgical explantation after TAVR remain limited.
CASE PRESENTATION An 85-year-old woman, 1-year post-TAVR, developed recurrent AS. Imaging revealed a mobile
transvalvular mass and subvalvular pannus. Medical therapy failed, and because of stroke risk, she underwent TAVR
explantation, subannular pannus resection, left ventricular outﬂow tract repair, and surgical aortic valve replacement.
Histology conﬁrmed leaﬂet thrombosis and valve deterioration.
DISCUSSION Surgical explantation after TAVR occurs in about 1% of cases. Among these, 47% require surgical aortic
valve replacement, and 53% need additional procedures, often involving the aorta. Recognizing structural valve
deterioration and its cause is critical.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE As TAVR use rises, so will complications. Further research is needed to enhance management
and outcomes. (JACC Case Rep. 2025;30:103885) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
HISTORY OF PRESENTATION
An
85-year-old
woman
presented
for
scheduled
follow-up
after
transfemoral
transcatheter
aortic
valve replacement (TAVR) (23-mm SAPIEN 3 Ultra
bovine
pericardial
bioprosthetic,
Edwards
Life-
sciences) for severe nonrheumatic aortic stenosis
(AS). Her calculated Society of Thoracic Surgeons
mortality score at the time of TAVR was 6.01%.
Postprocedural transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
showed trace pericardial effusion and satisfactory
valve hemodynamic status (aortic valve area [AVA]
2.4 cm2, mean gradient [MG] 4 mm Hg, pressure
gradient [PG] 9 mm Hg). The patient required perma-
nent pacemaker placement (Micra, Medtronic) on
postoperative day 3 for complete heart block and was
ISSN 2666-0849
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.103885
From the aDivision of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Valley Hospital, Ridgewood, New Jersey, USA; bDepartment of Cardiovascular
Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA; cDivision of Cardiac Imaging, The Valley Hospital,
Ridgewood, New Jersey, USA; and the dDivision of Interventional Cardiology, The Valley Hospital, Ridgewood, New Jersey, USA.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.
Manuscript received February 3, 2025; accepted February 25, 2025.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S
V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
ª 2 0 2 5 T H E A U T H O R S . P U B L I S H E D B Y E L S E V I E R O N B E H A L F O F T H E A M E R I C A N
C O L L E G E O F
C A R D I O L O G Y F O U N D A T I O N . T H I S
I S
A N
O P E N
A C C E S S
A R T I C L E
U N D E R
T H E C C B Y - N C - N D L I C E N S E ( h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 / ) .

=== PAGE 2 ===
discharged home on postoperative day 4.
Follow-up TTE at 1 year revealed reduced AVA
(0.5 cm2) with signiﬁcantly increased gradi-
ents (MG 48 mm Hg, PG 78 mm Hg). Despite
this, she was asymptomatic, in NYHA func-
tional class I.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
The patient’s medical history was signiﬁcant
for moderate tricuspid regurgitation, perma-
nent atrial ﬁbrillation (treated with apix-
aban), baseline right bundle branch block,
hyperlipidemia, type 2 diabetes, breast can-
cer status post left-sided mastectomy, stable
stage IIA invasive ductal right-sided breast
cancer
maintained
on
neoadjuvant
anas-
trozole, right posterior cerebral artery stroke
with mild residual left-sided hemiparesis,
and multiple transient ischemic attacks. The
patient is a lifelong nonsmoker.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis included hypoattenuated
leaﬂet thickening, transcatheter heart valve throm-
bosis, early structural valve deterioration (SVD), and
prosthetic valve endocarditis.
INVESTIGATIONS
The physical examination was unremarkable other
than a II/VI systolic ejection murmur over the right
upper sternal border, with normal vital signs and
ventricular
paced
rhythm.
Hematologic
and
biochemical results were all within normal limits.
Work-up for hypercoagulable disorders or malig-
nancies was negative, as was infective work-up for
prosthetic valve endocarditis (normal white blood cell
count, differential, and negative 5-day blood cul-
tures). TTE showed new severe AS (AVA 0.5 cm2, MG
48 mm Hg, PG 78 mm Hg), with no regurgitation or
paravalvular leak and normal left ventricular ejection
fraction. Moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation
and mild to moderate mitral regurgitation were also
present.
Computed tomography (CT) of the heart with
contrast performed using
photon-counting multi-
detector CT (Naeotom Alpha, Siemens Healthineers)
demonstrated a large, mobile transvalvular mass
(24  3 mm) arising from the junction of the right and
left coronary cusp leaﬂets, which was also attached to
the left leaﬂet. The mass was protruding in and out of
the aorta and left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT)
during the cardiac cycle, suspicious for thrombus or
vegetation. There was also a subvalvular circumfer-
ential pannus (3-4 mm thick) (Figure 1, Video 1).
MANAGEMENT
The patient was reviewed by the multidisciplinary
heart team for surgical explantation of the TAVR
prosthesis and leaﬂet mass and surgical aortic valve
replacement
(SAVR)
after
conservative
treatment
with warfarin was unsuccessful. Percutaneous op-
tions were deemed prohibitive because of very high
risk
for
cerebrovascular
vascular
accident.
Her
calculated Society of Thoracic Surgeons mortality
score for SAVR after TAVR was 10.4%. The patient
underwent successful surgical removal of the leaﬂet
mass, followed by TAVR explantation, LVOT pannus
resection and reconstruction, SAVR with a 23-mm
Inspiris Resilia bioprosthetic valve (Edwards Life-
sciences),
tricuspid
valve
repair,
and
left
atrial
appendage ligation.
Intraoperatively, the patient was placed on car-
diopulmonary bypass and the heart arrested. An aor-
totomy was performed, and the TAVR prosthesis and
aortic root were inspected. The transvalvular mass
was readily apparent and removed ﬁrst (Figure 2A).
Originating below the TAVR leaﬂets, the mass was
resected from its attachment at the base of the left and
right TAVR commissure (Figure 2B). The TAVR was
otherwise well seated, and all 3 leaﬂets were normal
appearing, without calciﬁcation or signs of SVD.
Intravalvular inspection of the LVOT conﬁrmed the
presence of a large subvalvular pannus (as suspected
on preoperative CT), which signiﬁcantly narrowed the
LVOT, resulting in the patient’s de novo AS.
Next, the TAVR was explanted using the double
Kocher technique, and the native aortic valve leaﬂets
were resected, exposing the aortic annulus and pan-
nus.1 The pannus was located just below the native
aortic
valve
annulus
(subannular)
and
was
near
circumferential, measuring about 1 cm in thickness
and extending from the native left/noncommissure to
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES
 Advanced cardiac imaging, especially cine
CT, is crucial for detecting both leaﬂet
thrombosis and subvalvular pannus post-
TAVR, guiding appropriate and timely
surgical intervention.
 Given the high mortality risk associated with
TAVR explantation and reintervention, care-
ful patient selection, adherence to surgical
indications, and long-term follow-up are
vital for optimizing outcomes.
A B B R E V I A T I O N S
A N D A C R O N Y M S
AS = aortic stenosis
AVA = aortic valve area
BVD = bioprosthetic valve
dysfunction
CT = computed tomography
LVOT = left ventricular outﬂow
tract
MG = mean gradient
PG = pressure gradient
SAVR = surgical aortic valve
replacement
SVD = structural valve
deterioration
TAVR = transcatheter aortic
valve replacement
TEE = transesophageal
echocardiography
TTE = transthoracic
echocardiography
Jabagi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Leaﬂet Mass and Stenosis Requiring TAVR Explantation
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 5
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
the right/noncommissure (Figure 2C). The annulus
was debrided of any calcium and the subannular
pannus carefully resected off the LVOT using a
scalpel. Great care was taken not to injure or remove
any native endocardium in order to preserve LVOT
structural integrity. After resection, a defect below
the annulus along the right coronary cusp was pre-
sent, necessitating repair. Several interrupted non-
pledgeted 4-0 Prolene sutures (Johnson & Johnson)
were used to bring native LVOT endocardium up to
the aortic valve annulus, closing the defect and
restoring structural integrity of the LVOT.
FIGURE 2
Intraoperative Images of Mobile THV Mass and Subvalvular Pannus
Freely mobile intravalvular transcatheter heart valve (THV) mass (A) measuring about 2.5 cm in length, with attachment base located just below the left coronary cusp
(LCC)/right coronary cusp (RCC) commissure (B) of the THV. (C) Near circumferential subvalvular pannus formation after valve explantation, measuring about 1 cm in
thickness and extending from the native aortic valve LCC/noncoronary cusp (NCC) commissure to the RCC/NCC commissure.
FIGURE 1
Preoperative Photon-Counting Multidetector Computed Tomography of the Heart With Contrast Depicting Subvalvular Pannus and Mass Associated
With Bioprosthetic Aortic Valve
(A) Bioprosthetic aortic valve at mid-diastole. (B, C) Circumferential pannus formation and mass projecting into the left ventricular outﬂow tract (see Video 1
demonstrating the mobility of the mass).
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Jabagi et al
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 5
Leaﬂet Mass and Stenosis Requiring TAVR Explantation
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
The root and left ventricle were then irrigated, and
the annulus was sized to a 23-mm Inspiris aortic
valve. Pledgeted, noneverting horizontal mattress
annular sutures were then placed circumferentially
and passed through the sewing ring. The valve was
parachuted into position and secured to the annulus
using Cor-Knots (LSI Solutions). On inspection, the
valve appeared well seated with no gaps, and the
aortotomy was closed. Tricuspid valve annuloplasty
was then completed (34-mm Contour 3D annuloplasty
ring, Medtronic) followed by ligation of the left atrial
appendage (45-mm AtriClip, AtriCure). Intraoperative
transesophageal
echocardiography
(TEE)
at
the
conclusion of the case showed normal biventricular
function, an AVA of 2.25 cm2 with an MG of 2 mm Hg,
and trace tricuspid regurgitation.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient was maintained on inotropic support
following surgery and was extubated within 24 hours.
Because
of
pre-existing
pulmonary
hypertension,
milrinone was slowly weaned by postoperative day 5.
Her postoperative recovery was otherwise uncom-
plicated, and she was discharged on postoperative
day 10. Histopathologic analysis of all surgical speci-
mens was completed. The intravalvular mass was
identiﬁed as fragments of soft tissue, predominantly
ﬁbrin with mixed acute and chronic inﬂammation on
histopathology (Figure 3), while analysis of pannus
specimens revealed dense ﬁbrous tissue, with rare
viable myocytes associated with chronic and focal
active inﬂammation (Figure 4). At 1-month follow-up,
the patient had made a complete recovery and was
asymptomatic. Repeat TTE showed a stable aortic
valve prosthesis with normal hemodynamic status,
no AS, aortic insufﬁciency, or paravalvular leak.
DISCUSSION
The
rapid
global
adoption
of
TAVR
has
quickly
transformed TAVR into a widely accepted and stan-
dardized treatment for AS, offering a less invasive
alternative
to
SAVR.
With
demonstrated
success
across diverse patient populations and recent ran-
domized controlled trials demonstrating comparable,
if not superior, outcomes to SAVR in low-risk pa-
tients, TAVR has become the preferred treatment
strategy for AS, regardless of surgical risk, exceeding
all forms of SAVR volumes since 2019.2-6 However,
despite this signiﬁcant advancement, the relatively
recent introduction of TAVR limits the availability of
long-term outcome data, especially concerning valve
durability.7 This knowledge gap has become increas-
ingly
critical
as
TAVR
use
expands,
particularly
among deployments in younger patients, who will
require longer term valve functionality.
Bioprosthetic valve dysfunction (BVD) is classiﬁed
into 4 categories: SVD, non-SVD, prosthetic valve
thrombosis, and endocarditis, all of which can affect
valve durability (Supplemental Table 1). SVD, endo-
carditis,
and
non-SVD,
speciﬁcally
severe
PVL,
following TAVR are the most common complications
that lead to valve reintervention or TAVR explanta-
tion, with a 30-day mortality rate approaching 16%.7-11
The incidence of transcatheter heart valve thrombosis
FIGURE 3
Histopathology of the Transcatheter Heart Valve Intravalvular Mass
Sections of the intravalvular mass show portions of ﬁbrous tissue with a focally prominent mixed inﬂammatory inﬁltrate consisting of plasma cells with some
lymphocytes and neutrophils and abundant ﬁbrin. (1) Intravalvular mass at 100 magniﬁcation. (2) Intravalvular mass at 200 magniﬁcation. (3) Intravalvular mass at
400 magniﬁcation, with prominent inﬂammatory inﬁltrate.
Jabagi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Leaﬂet Mass and Stenosis Requiring TAVR Explantation
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 5
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
ranges from 0.6% to 40% following TAVR, and it pre-
sents a signiﬁcant risk for embolization, including ce-
rebrovascular
events
and/or
arterial
embolisms;
transcatheter heart valve leaﬂet thrombosis may also
result
in
valve
dysfunction
and
early
degenera-
tion.7,12,13 In the case of TAVR explantation, mini-
mizing additional interventions is crucial to reduce
mortality risk. In our case, we limited interventions to
those with strong indications for surgical intervention,
speciﬁcally addressing the most signiﬁcant valvular
issues while also performing left atrial appendage
ligation to prevent thromboembolic events, a particu-
larly valuable approach given the patient’s age and
history of atrial ﬁbrillation.
The
most
common
causes
of
prosthetic
valve
obstruction
are
prosthetic
valve
thrombosis
and
pannus formation.14-16 Differentiating between these
2 conditions is crucial, as prosthetic valve thrombosis
can often be treated with ﬁbrinolysis, whereas pan-
nus requires surgical intervention to relieve the
obstruction. Herein, we describe a unique case of
early BVD and valve obstruction in a TAVR patient
caused by concomitant leaﬂet thrombosis and sub-
valvular pannus formation. In this case, cine CT pro-
vided
signiﬁcant
diagnostic
value,
not
only
enhancing the visualization of the transvalvular mass
but also identifying subvalvular pannus in the LVOT,
which required intervention at the time of TAVR
explantation. The ability of cine CT to detect such
anatomical nuances makes it an invaluable imaging
modality, complementing other techniques such as
3-dimensional
TEE.
This
multimodality
imaging
approach
was
key
to
accurately
diagnosing
the
etiology of valve dysfunction and guiding the appro-
priate surgical plan.
Pannus formation in prosthetic valves is charac-
terized
by
excessive
tissue
ingrowth
leading
to
obstruction
and
occurs
as
a
chronic
process,
commonly occurring about 5 years postimplantation.
Although the exact etiology remains uncertain, pan-
nus is thought to result from a nonimmune mecha-
nism involving proliferation of ﬁbroelastic connective
tissue and collagen, triggered by a reactive inﬂam-
matory process to the prosthetic valve.14-18 The pro-
cess typically begins at the suture line and is more
common in the aortic valve prothesis. Pannus for-
mation occurs primarily on the ventricular side of the
prosthesis,14,19 leading to valvular obstruction arising
from LVOT narrowing when the pannus remains
conﬁned below the valve or by pannus extension up
to the valve oriﬁce or hinges, restricting leaﬂets
mobility. In comparison, prosthetic valve thrombosis
occurs more frequently in mitral valve prostheses,
occurs early after valve implantation, usually in the
setting of inadequate anticoagulation, and can be
either supravalvular or subvalvular.
As per the 2020 American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association guidelines for the man-
agement of valvular disease, the evaluation of pros-
thetic valve obstruction beings with TTE or TEE,
where thrombi usually appear larger and irregular
and cause valve restriction, with a density <0.7.5
Three-dimensional TEE and multidetector-row CT,
as used in this case, are complementary imaging
modalities that assist in distinguishing thrombus
from
pannus
(Supplemental
Table
1).14,17,18,20
FIGURE 4
Histopathology of Subvalvular Pannus
Sections of the transcatheter heart valve subvalvular mass show ﬁbrous tissue, with rare viable myocytes at the periphery, associated with chronic and focal active
inﬂammation, with prominent plasma cells. (1) Subannular mass (100 magniﬁcation). (2) Subannular mass (300 magniﬁcation) with myocytes at the periphery of
the tissue (right) and inﬂammatory inﬁltrate. (3) Subannular mass (400 magniﬁcation) inﬁltrate with prominent plasma cells.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Jabagi et al
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 5
Leaﬂet Mass and Stenosis Requiring TAVR Explantation
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
Although thrombus is typically treated successfully
with anticoagulation, the failure of warfarin therapy
often suggests pannus as the more likely diagnosis,
with surgery being the only curative option, as
demonstrated in this case.15
Although thrombosis or pannus formation is a
well-documented complication, the need for surgical
explantation of a TAVR remains relatively rare,10 with
TAVR explantation reported in only about 1.0% of
patients
across
various
meta-analyses.21,22
When
surgically treated, 47% of patients require SAVR and
53% require concomitant procedures, with ascending
or aortic root repair being the most common.10
It is important to note that this case occurred 1 year
postoperatively.
Research
indicates
that
surgical
explantation
beyond
this
time
frame
becomes
signiﬁcantly
more
technically
challenging.22
Furthermore, both age and Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons Predicted Risk of Mortality were higher in the
presented case (85 years of age; 10.4) compared with
the average age and Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Predicted
Risk
of
Mortality
reported
for
TAVR
explantation (73.7 years of age; 5.9).10
This case highlights the importance of identifying
BVD and accurately determining its etiology. Proper
differentiation is essential, as it guides the appro-
priate approach for successful treatment.15,23 Initial
evaluation with TTE is standard and allows assess-
ments of prosthetic valve hemodynamic performance.
TEE is complementary and recommended if ﬁndings
of thrombosis are present to assess thrombus burden
of left-sided valves. TEE also allows better assessment
and visualization of the posterior aspect of aortic
prostheses. However, evaluation of BVD using TTE
and TEE may be limited by acoustic shadowing, hin-
dering the identiﬁcation of pannus or thrombus. Dis-
tinguishing between thrombus and pannus can be
exceedingly difﬁcult with echocardiography alone,
and often requires cardiac CT (Supplemental Table 2).
Evaluation of prosthetic valves using multidetector
CT can detect the presence of masses and abnormal
leaﬂet motion and has the ability to discriminate
thrombus from pannus using differences in attenua-
tion
as
measured in
HU; in one
study, pannus
demonstrated enhancement >145 HU.24,25
CONCLUSIONS
This case highlights a rare but signiﬁcant complica-
tion following TAVR, involving concomitant leaﬂet
thrombosis and subvalvular pannus formation, lead-
ing to early BVD at 1 year, necessitating high-risk
reintervention. The case underscores the critical role
of advanced cardiac imaging, particularly cine CT, in
detecting both transvalvular masses and subvalvular
LVOT
obstructions,
which
guided
the
surgical
approach.
The
mortality
associated
with
TAVR
explantation, especially when additional procedures
are required, emphasizes the need to focus on Class I
surgical indications and minimize unnecessary in-
terventions. Left atrial appendage ligation, in this
context, was a preventive measure against thrombo-
embolic complications in a high-risk patient. Vigilant
long-term follow-up and further research into TAVR-
related BVD and its mechanisms remain essential for
improving patient outcomes.
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the contents of this paper to disclose.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Habib Jabagi, The
Valley Hospital, 4 Valley Health Plaza, Paramus, New
Jersey 07652, USA. E-mail: jabaha@valleyhealth.com.
R E F E R E N C E S
1. Kaneko T, Bapat VN, Alakhtar AM, et al. Trans-
catheter
heart
valve
explantation
for
trans-
catheter aortic valve replacement failure: a Heart
Valve Collaboratory expert consensus document
on operative techniques. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2024;169(3):878–889.
2. Fukuhara S, Brescia AA, Shiomi S, et al. Surgical
explantation
of
transcatheter
aortic
bio-
prostheses:
results
and
clinical
implications.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;162(2):539–547.e1.
3. Popma JJ, Deeb GM, Yakubov SJ, et al, for the
Evolut Low Risk Trial Investigators. Transcatheter
aortic-valve replacement with a self-expanding
valve
in
low-risk
patients.
N
Engl
J
Med.
2019;380(18):1706–1715.
4. Mack MJ, Leon MB, Thourani VH, Makkar R,
et al, for the PARTNER 3 Investigators. Trans-
catheter aortic-valve replacement with a balloon-
expandable valve in low-risk patients. N Engl J
Med. 2019;380(18):1695–1705.
5. Writing
Committee
Members,
Otto
CM,
Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA
guideline for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease: executive summary: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Joint Committee on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2021;77(4):450–500.
6. Mori M, Gupta A, Wang Y, et al. Trends in
transcatheter and surgical aortic valve replace-
ment among older adults in the United States.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78(22):2161–2172.
7. Ng ACT, Holmes DR, Mack MJ, et al. Leaﬂet
immobility and thrombosis in transcatheter aortic
valve replacement. Eur Heart J. 2020;41(33):
3184–3197.
8. Imaeda S, Inohara T, Yoshijima N, et al. Natural
history of leaﬂet thrombosis after transcatheter
Jabagi et al
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Leaﬂet Mass and Stenosis Requiring TAVR Explantation
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 5
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
aortic valve replacement: a 5-year follow-up
study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022;11(23):e026334.
9. Capodanno AD, Petronio AS, Prendergast B,
et al. Standardized deﬁnitions of structural dete-
rioration and valve failure in assessing long-term
durability of transcatheter and surgical aortic
bioprosthetic valves: a consensus statement from
the European Association of Percutaneous Car-
diovascular Interventions (EAPCI) endorsed by the
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the
European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery
(EACTS). Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;38(45):
3382–3390.
10. Yokoyama Y, Kuno T, Zaid S, et al. Surgical
explantation of transcatheter aortic bioprosthesis:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JTCVS
Open. 2021;8:207–227.
11. Bapat VN, Zaid S, Fukuhara S, et al. Surgical
explantation after TAVR failure: mid-term out-
comes from the EXPLANT-TAVR international
registry.
JACC
Cardiovasc
Interv.
2021;14(18):
1978–1991.
12. Koren O, Patel V, Chakravarty T, et al. Leaﬂet
thrombosis in transcatheter aortic valve interven-
tion: mechanisms, prevention, and treatment op-
tions. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023;10:1249604.
13. Chakravarty T, Søndergaard L, Friedman J,
et al. Subclinical leaﬂet thrombosis in surgical and
transcatheter
bioprosthetic
aortic
valves:
an
observational study. Lancet. 2017;389(10087):
2383–2392.
14. Moldovan
MS,
Bedeleanu
D,
Kovacs
E,
Ciumarnean L, Molnar A. Pannus-related pros-
thetic valve dysfunction. Case report. Clujul Med.
2016;89(1):169–175.
15. Bonnichsen CR, Pellikka PA. Prosthetic valve
thrombus versus pannus: progress with imaging.
Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;8(12):e004283.
16. Takemoto
S,
Kumano
H,
Shimamura
J,
Shiose A, et al. Pannus formation: a rare culprit
of early bioprosthetic valve dysfunction—a case
report.
Eur
Heart
J
Case
Rep.
2024;8(10):
ytae518.
17. Barbetseas
J,
Nagueh
SF,
Pitsavos
C,
Toutouzas PK, Quiñones MA, Zoghbi WA. Differ-
entiating thrombus from pannus formation in
obstructed mechanical prosthetic valves: an eval-
uation
of
clinical,
transthoracic
and
trans-
esophageal echocardiographic parameters. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 1998;32(5):1410–1417.
18. Tanis W, Habets J, van den Brink RBA, et al.
Differentiation of thrombus from pannus as the
cause of acquired mechanical prosthetic heart
valve obstruction by non-invasive imaging: a re-
view of the literature. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Im-
aging. 2014;15(2):119–129.
19. Darwazah AK. Recurrent pannus formation
causing prosthetic aortic valve dysfunction: is
excision without valve re-replacement applicable?
J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012.
20. Teshima H, Hayashida N, Enomoto N, et al.
Detection
of
pannus
by
multidetector-row
computed
tomography.
Ann
Thorac
Surg.
2003;75(5):1631–1633.
21. Tacon PR, Cao L, Birkeland K, Kedan I. Case
report: a transcatheter aortic valve replacement
failure secondary to COVID-19 infection. Eur Heart
J Case Rep. 2023;7(2):ytad054.
22. Abbasciano RG, Magouliotis DE, Koulouroudias M,
et al. Valve type and operative risks in surgical
explantation of transcatheter aortic valves: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Med.
2024;13(5):1262.
23. Roudaut R, Serri K, Laﬁtte S. Thrombosis of
prosthetic heart valves: diagnosis and therapeutic
considerations. Heart. 2007;93(1):137–142.
24. Verma M, Pandey NN, Kumar S, Ramakrishnan S.
Imaging spectrum of valvular and paravalvular
complications of prosthetic heart valve at CT angi-
ography. Radiol Cardiothorac Imaging. 2021;3(4):
e210159.
25. Gündüz S, Özkan M, Kalçik M, et al. Sixty-four-
section cardiac computed tomography in me-
chanical
prosthetic
heart
valve
dysfunction:
thrombus or pannus. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging.
2015;8(12):e003246.
KEY WORDS aortic valve, valve repair,
valve replacement
APPENDIX For a supplemental tables,
please see the online version of this paper.
J A C C : C A S E R E P O R T S , V O L . 3 0 , N O . 1 8 , 2 0 2 5
Jabagi et al
J U L Y 9 , 2 0 2 5 : 1 0 3 8 8 5
Leaﬂet Mass and Stenosis Requiring TAVR Explantation
7
